

--- PAGE 1 ---

A
S C R E E N W R I T E R S
G U I D E  F O R  
T H E  R O A D


--- PAGE 2 ---

 
Written by  
Richard Goteri 
& 
Michael Mili

--- PAGE 3 ---

Copyright © 201 2 – 2021 Richard Goteri & Michael Mili 
All rights reserved.  
ISBN : 979847733631 9 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---

DEDICATION 
Rich Goteri & Mike Mili  
Would like to dedicate this book to our  loving 
Wives & Childr en

--- PAGE 5 ---

T here are man y roads to R ome,  this is ours.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---

 TABLE OF CONTENT S 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
  
1. INTRODUCTION        page 3  
RULES OF THE ROAD      page 6  
 
2. WHAT’S YOUR STORY        page 31  
 
3. THE JOURNEY         page 38  
    
4. THE THREE ACT ROAD  (3 act structure)   page 47  
    
5. CREATING CHARACTER      page 52  
 
6. PROTECTIN G MY WORK       page 73  
 7. AGREEMENTS         page 85  
 8. YOUR SCREENWRITERS ROAD TESTS   page 93  
 9. SIGNATORY LITERARY AGENCIES    page 104  
  SCRIPT RESOURCES       page 114  
 SITES FOR SCREENWRITERS    page 114 
       10. GLOSSARY OF WORDS & TERMS    page 115  
 
 ABOUT THE AUTHORS       page 133  
 Extra Luggage Section  
 INDEX  

--- PAGE 8 ---

i ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
 
 
You know who you are…  
 
 
 
Thanks!

--- PAGE 9 ---

www.WordsToFilmBy.com

--- PAGE 10 ---

3 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
ARE YOU READY FOR THE ROAD? 
 
Anytime you take a long journey  or a major trip to a foreign 
land, you first have to ask yourself  a couple of questions…  
“Am I ready and able to take time off of my regular job  to do 
this? ” “Do I have any vacation time saved up?” “ Am I ready 
to take on the challenge and jump  into the unknown? These 
are questions that you need t o ask yourself, e specially, when 
your journey is going to take you to somewhere that you’ve 
never been before. Going to a land where they speak a different language and having to follow a map written in  
another language can be pretty confusing not to menti on a 
little d angerous. You may have to rely  on a translator or put 
your trust in  a foreign tourist guide.  Or you can use all the 
resources and technology that you have waiting for you, right at your own fingertips  and learn enough of the language, 
custo ms and the ways of the land that you plan to visit. In 
that way you can make your journey a successful one.  
  

--- PAGE 11 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
4 Have you had enough of the colorful metaphors yet? That’s 
one of the joys of writing, being cr eative with the words you 
have to work with. Using t he traveler journey as a metaphor 
is not too far from the actual truth. Writing a screenplay for a movie from its first idea to its final shot on the page, is a journey. Once you’ve  learned  the language, universal 
customs and proper etiquette of screenwrit ing; you and your 
new script will be granted a passport into the filmmaking community. It’s there that your work will have to stand on its own, before the readers, producers, actors and financers of movie  studio productions. It’s there that they will deter mine 
that the words you used in your script to tell your story, are worthy for them to film by.  
Thoug
h this book is not designed to teach 
you how to write, it is here to open your minds to the simplicities of the format and the proper way to tell your s tory in the 
language called, screenwriting.  Until you’ve mastered the 
craft and actually sold something, don’t quit your day job.  
  You’
ve probably got a million or two good ideas for what 
you want to  write a movie  about . You’ve probably jotted your 
ideas down on bar napkins, a notebook, your smart phone 
by texting yourself. You may have even started a few rough drafts but gave up because you didn’t know if you were on the right track or what exactly you needed to do . Forget all 
the GOOD ideas that have and focus in on your one GREAT 
idea and we will help you build on it.  
1 a. 
WHAT IS A SCREENPLAY?  
In the beginning was the WORD !    Genesis 1:1  
It’s a favorite verse for us  writers , It makes us feel  import ant. 
• A sc
reenplay or script is a blueprint for pr oducing a motion
picture. It can be adapted from a previous work such as anovel, play or short story, or it may be an original work in andof itself. Every year, the Academy of  Motion Picture  Arts and
Sciences hands out Oscars in both Original  Screenplay  and


--- PAGE 12 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
5 Adapted Screenplay categories. The Writers Guild of  
America has final control on who may be awarded 
screenwriting credit for  a screenplay.  
 A Screenplay  is written to be made into a movie. Normal 
length is 86 -120 pp.  The script is the world created by  you, 
“THE GOD ” of your  world.  As a Screenwriter  you are God, 
Only you and maybe a handful of your family, friends and followers believe in you until the finish of your script. After that the “Film Gods”  take over; Producers, Directors and 
every other per son that has a title.  In reality,  a screenwriter 
is considered by the studios,  to be the lowest on the totem -
pole amongst the film making hierarchy. Their standard comment is, “Good scripts are a dime a dozen on the streets of Hollywood!”  That may be true , so make sure you write a 
great one… Those are at the very least a dollar a dozen. It’s up to your representation to convince the producers that your script is worth more, but will talk about that later.  
 
The true definition of a screenwriter  is: a 
write r who either adapts an existing work for  
production as a movie, or creates a new original screenplay.  A Script  or a 
Screenplay is a document that “ OUTLINES ” all the parts 
required to tell a story;  visually, behaviorally, and verbally .  
 When creating a fil m the reason we use outlines is simple; 
the filmmaking process is a collaborative effort involving the 
director, cast, editor, and production crew who will, based on 
your "outline", interpret your story their way when it is  filmed? 
Wow, what happened! Hey guys, I wrote the bible; and it’s my world and you can’t change it. Wrong! By selling or 
optioning your script, you are no- longer  God… You have 
done what G od has done; you have granted free- will to man.  
Having done this, they may, or may not consult with y ou on 
changes. Don’t be offended if they bring in other writers, or 
ask you to re -write the entire thing.  
 


--- PAGE 13 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
6 That's the life of the screenwriter. So many people are 
involved in the making of  a film; your sc ript must co nform to 
their needs, with a specific format that meets  everyone’s 
needs. Remember, if you can’t handle this, and can’t conform to the will of the studio exec’s or producers, you will 
not succeed in their world. At that  point if you are that 
passionate about your script, raise the money and become  a 
filmmaker and produce it yourself. It’s okay… The credit will 
read: A Johnny Anton Film… Written and Directed by 
Johnny Anton… That is the only way to secure your written 
world, as your own. But then their the  Film Distributors, but 
that’s another story . 
 Remember, that movies are VISUAL. You don't tell your audience your story, you SHOW them pictures. You must 
learn to write a screenplay VISUALLY. Write what they will 
SEE, HEAR and even FEEL emotionally. You mig ht really 
love the  characters that you hav e created;  knowing what 
they think and do.  However,  the magic  of screenwriting  is 
how to show it on the big, small or micro -screen. When the 
magic  happens, it may be with a glance, a stare, a smile or a  
frown, the interpretations  that come from the talents  of the 
actor  - director relationship. So just write the pictures, 
sounds, and speeches, and leave the rest for the filmmakers.  
 1b. BASIC SCREENWRITING RULES OF THE ROAD Acco rding to us, here are somet hing’s to wa tch out for. We 
know people who make their  living as “Readers”, who have 
to read upward of 20 to 25 scripts per week. They have to write coverage for their producers, directors, studio exec’s or  
actors; who have to make a decision to buy or opt ion them. 
They have to give an opinion whether writers  have to rewrite 
them, and try to get actors, directors and money attached to 
them. Between the two of us we've written 25 screenplays,  
many of them commissioned,  a couple sold, but not 
produced. Currently,  a couple of projects are in pre-
production, but  there’s no guarantee when they will be 
complete.  

--- PAGE 14 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
7 
For example: A few years back I had the opportunity 
to work on a film with a big name, legendary actor, it was great. As an actor, I couldn’t help but feel that this was a great opportunity to expand on m y acting 
career … Not to mention the notoriety alone would 
have been enough to book my next gig. Unfortunately, that was not the case. Though the script was pretty well written and had a great story to tel l, the film has never been 
completed.  The director wa s fired over personal differences 
with the producers and another inexperienced director took over the shoot. Though well intentioned, it was a bad move and sad for the films writer. The film is in a per petual state  of 
post-production.  
Rem
ember, this i s the life, that you’ve chosen. 
Though it is very personal, i t’s a business and 
tough one at that… B est of luck!  
DOE
S SPELLING COUNT?  
Absolutely! Don’t ever trust spell -check, it makes mistakes 
as well. If a READER  sees "your" instead of "you're" or "it's " 
for "its," believe me, they’ll toss the script  out on the spot. 
Being required to read so many scripts, bad spelling, gets on  
their nerves.  
SHO
ULD I MAKE MY SCRIPT STANDOUT?  
Only by pitching a superior  idea or writing a better script, 
making  it stand out.  A scripts appearance  has to look a 
certain way  and must conform to a universal format . Picture 
and other nonsense, should have no part in your presentation. I can't stress this point enough. You must  
present your work like an insider. The sheer volume o f 
submissions makes it so  that if ANYTHING about your script 
looks strange it's headed for the trash can . If you don't know 
the game they won't play. The sc reenwriter has to adhere to  
conventions covering everything from how many pages to 
what font (Courier 12 pitch in the U.S.), and that's just the 
beginning.  


--- PAGE 15 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
8 I strongly urge that you follow all the formatting rules  to the 
letter , unless you're self-sufficiently  wealthy and plan to 
finance, produce, and direct your own movie. Even then, the 
entire cast an d crew  you'll need to work with will be  
accustomed to the universally standard format . 
Jus
t so you know this…  The first script you’ll be writing will 
be considered a SPEC SCRIPT .  A spec script, also kno wn 
as a SPEC ULATIVE SCREENPLAY, is a non -commissione d 
unsolicited screenplay. It is usually written by a screenwriter 
who hopes to have the script optioned and eventually purchased by a producer, production company, or studio.  
In t
he film industry, an OPTION  is a 
contractual agreement between a 
potential film producer  or company.  
BASI
C SCREENPLAY FORMAT  
A lot has been written about screenplay format, much of it overly rigid. However,  an improperly formatted script is going 
to get chucked faster than a pr operly  forma tted script. The 
basic points are as fol lows: 
• It is written: “You must pretend you are still are working on
a typewriter.”  That means no font other than:
Courier 12
No bol
dface. No justified text.  No italics. Use underlining 
instead. For  those without screenwriting  software. Once you 
set yo ur tabs in MS Word or other word processing  
programs you should be good to go. We use Movie Magic Screenwriter.  
• Mar
gins are supposed to be 1.5 inches left, 1.00 inches
right (to account for  the three- hole punch). Mine are usually
1.25 inches left, 1 i nch right.


--- PAGE 16 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
9 •Title page  has title and screenwriter's name(s) in the
middle, and where to find you (including your e- mail
address) at the lower right hand.  (See Example at end of this chapter .)
•Nev
er put a date on your script, or what draft it is.  Your final
draft is their first.
• N
ever include a page telling us about the characters and
their back -story. That’s your own private information, to help
you in developing your characters.
• Tr
aditionally, the first pa ge starts with FADE IN: However,
this is  not gospel  and most cases has disappeared
altogether .
Here are some essential items that you always need to pack. 
With e ach introduction of a scene, a single line of information 
called the slugline , ap pears in all  caps. This slugline  
contains the locati on information and time of day. Almost all 
sluglines begin with INT. (interior) or EXT. (exterior). There 
are very few exceptions. For example, when repeatedly 
cutting back to a scene or moving through locations with in 
the principle location.    
You’
ll bec ome accustomed to s creenplay format and quickly 
adapt to the simplicity of it.  
 In a s
creenplay your story  is divided into many scenes and 
each of these scenes is a location. A location when written in 
a screenplay needs to be descr ibed by the screenwriter so 
that it is instantly understood by all reading it.  
Agai
n, these three pieces of information are necessary. 
• W
hether it's interior (INT.) or exterior ( EXT.)
• Where the scene takes place,  (WILL’S OFF ICE)
• Time of  day (NIGHT, DAY, ETC…)

--- PAGE 17 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
10 
• SLUGLINES  take on this  form shown below : 
 
INT.  WILL’S OFFICE -- BACK ROOM -- DAY 
or 
EXT.  STOOP’S CORP. –- ALLEY -- NIGHT  
 
•  ABBREVIATIONS  
The film industry uses several abbreviations as shortcuts in scripts. It's up to you whether you use these abbreviations or 
not.  
O.S., Off Screen  
O.C., Off Camera  
V.O. – Voice Over  
b.g. = background  
CGI = computer generated image f.g. = foreground  
SFX = sound effects  
SFX a sound effect is needed.  
SPFX = special effects  
POV = po int of view  
 M.O.S. = without sound  is my favorite  abbreviation.  
The story goes that a German director Josef von 
Sternberg, who discovered Marlene Dietrich wanted to shoot a scene without sound and told the crew to shoot "mit out 
sound," a phrase which the crew found humorous and thus 
proliferated it. It is  most commonly used to show impending 
impact of some kind.  
 • Descriptive text is 60 characters (about 6 inches) wide.  
 • Character names are all caps, centered over the dialog, or 
indented. Traditionalists indent.  I center, its cleaner. Again, 
my Movie Magic Screenwriter Software  makes this 
process a no- brainer.   
 
             WILLIAM 
                           ("ga sping") 
I just wanted to take Sally to 
dinner... Maybe a show! Now Sally probably thinks I'm dating that crazy 
woman! Just forget about it! 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
11 We’ve more to say Re: Character Names in the chapter  2. 
 
•  PARENTHETICALS  
Parentheticals are those little parenthesized instructions to the actor that come between the character name and their dialog. Parentheticals  ("gasping") are centered under name 
and o ver dialog; or, for traditionalists, indented. It  helps avoid 
having  to give a whole line of action as well :  
 
MAGOO 
(shakes) 
Are you gonna eat that? 
This tells us how the line is to be given:  
SAL 
(irritated) 
           Why, do you want it?   
 
Don’t us e it when the line is obvious:  
MAGOO 
(angry) 
I was just being polite, you bastard! 
I’ll bust your head open. 
 
Of course he's angry. Just cut the parenthetical in this case.  
 
Parentheticals should not be used 
becau se you as the screenwriter are too  
lazy t o come up with a line t hat expresses 
the right emotion. They’re great page 
savers when you need to cut your page count down.   if you're good fortune smiles your way, and you get read by many readers, i f you’re lucky enough to be given notes or 
suggestions ; take them to heart, consider them all 
suggestions. It doesn’t mean that they’re right; it means you 


--- PAGE 19 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
12 got read. The reality is, that in most cases the readers will 
not give your script the benefit of the doubt; If a line is not obvious, and there's no pare nthetical to tell them it’s  tone is 
the opposite of its supposed meaning, they'll just be confused as to why all of a sudden Magoo is glad to see someone they thought he hated.  
Mos
t readers never recover from it,  because they will almost 
never take the t ime to figure out what went wrong. They'll 
just keep reading on, faster and faster, so they can finish and get to sleep.   So keep the important  parentheticals in. If 
you can, try to cut as many parenth eticals as  you can , a lot 
of actors and directors hate  them; They think you're trying to 
do their job.  
• Dialo
g is about 30 characters, or about 3 inches, wide.
• Wher
e the same character speaks again after some scene
description, you put (cont.) in lowercase next to the
character name. Otherwise the reade r may assume your
second character is responding, even though you've written
the character name again.• When the character is speaking but is not in the scene, youput (V.O.) next to their character na me to indica te Voice
Over . Where we hear them  speaking and they are in the
scene but not on camera, you put (O.C.) to indicate Off
Camera. (O.S.) also indicates Off Screen . Either is fine.
• Wher
e dialogue continues over a page break, you will need
to repeat the  character name at the top of the page and add
(cont'd) next to the character name. That's so we know the
character is still talking.
Fo
r us, Movie Magic Screenwriter software 
helps alleviate the formatting tedium. 
Whether you use Movie Magic or another 
scree nwriting program , you will need a  
softwa re program to help you through the Shoot Script 
process.   


--- PAGE 20 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
13 •Scene numbers , are formatting cues used only in scripts
that are actually in pre- production or production, so that
scene breakdowns can be done more  efficiently.  There are
many programs on the mark et such as Movie Magic
Screenwriter, Final  Draft , or some of the new Apps and
online programs like Celtex  and others that will do the
formatting for you. They are totally necessary  when you are
in pre-p roduction because they put in the formatting cues.
They also do "A" and "B" pages, "X -changes" and a lot of
other things you don't need to know about until you're in
production.
•THE
 LENGTH OF A SCREENPLAY
The standard screenplay format generally breaks  down to
about a page a minute.  Theater owners reall y hate films over
two hours. Whether at the movies or at  home, watch in a film
of that length becomes a psychological brick wall for those
that have who have to work in the morning. There is somuch media- content on the market competing for your time,
viewer s have been more selective in their  viewing. Think
about it, you can choose the theatre’s Big Screen,Blockbuster -online,  Red-Box, Netflix, Cable T.V. on- demand,
The Internet, and now The Micro- Screen w ith its IPod s,
IPads, Tablets  and Smart -Phones.  The pressure is on the
producers and filmmakers not to have overlong pictures.
How
ever, that doesn’t mean that they’re not still multi -million 
dollar block busters.  King Kong was 3 hours and 11 minutes. 
It’s hard to gi ve up three hours of my life on an over 
extended film; the video was a half hour longer.. Titanic went 
out listed  at 2 hours 74 minutes, just so they wouldn't have to 
say it was over 3 hours long.  Lord of the Rings, Harry Potter, 
the list goes on… So just because they want  shorter movies, 
doesn’ t make it an absolute.  
So,
 a spec screenplay should be from 105 to 115. Anything 
over that gives one more excuse to reject it. (I wrote an 
adaptation of a combination of Edgar Allen Poe stories ), I 
went  way over 120 pages, but that was at the producers 

--- PAGE 21 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
14 request.  It was a work made for hire. You try looking at a 
script that’s 130 pages plus, it just  looks plain silly.  
 
A low budget spec screenplay, something that is intended for straight -to-video productio n under a mi llion bucks, should be 
95 to 99. Video dis tributors used to require that movies to be 
a minimum of 92 minutes long. The rule is more pages cost 
money . But the film distribution dynamic is ever changing 
and morphing. That’s a line in the sand th at keeps mov ing. 
Comedy scripts may also be shorter.  Comedy movies are 
rarely over 100 minutes  long. However, people talk faster in 
comedies, so you can probably break 100  pages in your 
script. Bear in mind that a shorter comedy is easier to keep funny. If you have a comedy script that's over 110 pages, go 
for it; Just make sure it’s drop dead funny.  
 •  BASIC STYLE  
In scene description, use short, declarative, visual  
sentences.  Keep putting pictures in the reader's mind.  
 
While WILLIAM speeds franticly down the 
road in his SPORTSCAR, the wind from his speeding car blows A BIRD into the face of the MOTOR CYCLE COP sitting on the 
side of the road The Cop fall off his 
bike.  
 
Do you see it in your mind’s  eye? 
Obviously, there is no dialogue, it is entirely vis ual. 
 •  NO CAMERA DIRECTION  
Please NEVER direct the camera in your script. It's annoying 
because it destroys  the reader's attempt to imagine the 
movie on their  own. What if  you saw the film crew on screen.   
In other words, don't write : CLOSE -UP 
 
CLOSE-UP on the policeman’s feathered 
covered face.   

--- PAGE 22 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
15 If it is Necessary,  you could say:  WE SEE 
 
We see nothing but feathers covering 
the policeman’s face. 
 
You’re still telling them it’s a CLOSE -UP but you didn’t break  
the rule of trying to play director.  The reader "sees" on ly 
what you the writer wants him or her to  see. The goal is to  
get the reader to imagine in his head what the director ought 
to shoot.  It’s a mind game I tell you!  
 
Remember; if  it's not important to a scene and does 
not propel the story forwar d don’t do it.  
 
In action  scenes you will want to i nclude as much visual data 
to propel your story without  slowing down the speed. 
However, in a dialogue driven scene, how the camera  
moves may be unimportant. The actor is telling the story. The director w ill try to  add as much to a scene by framing 
and mov ement. Try and keep it clever and just tell the story, 
keep your dramatic scenes pristine.  
 •  CUT TO’S & TRANSITIONS 
First off, though you need to learn about transitions, these days  transitions are frowned upon, es pecially in spec scripts. 
They are consi dered a waste of a couple of lines you could 
better use for brilliant dialogue, and are only used when absolutely necessary.  This has actually helped scripts get 
somewhat shorter.  I tried eliminating “CUT TO” out of  some 
of my older scripts and it actuall y reduced them by five of six 
pages.  
In between scenes, you put "CUT TO:" in your right margin, 
with a space before and a space after.  
After the "CUT TO:" comes a slugline that looks like this:  
 
 
INT. WILLIAM’S HOUSE - LOFT - DAY  
 
The CUT TO: says you're in a new scene.  
 
A SLUGLINE  tells a reader where a new scene takes place.  

--- PAGE 23 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
16 NOTE : You don’t use a CUT TO : when the 
scene is continuing in different parts of the 
same location, but you do use a slugline. 
Tr
ansitio ns you may be acquainted with are:  
CUT TO: 
SMASH CUT: TIME CUT: 
DISSOLVE TO: MATCH CUT: 
FADE IN: FADE TO: 
FADE OUT:
So, for example, between an exterior and an interior, you 
would not use a CUT TO:  
INT.  WILLIAM’S HOUSE - DAY 
  The Pit Bull tries to come inside. 
 
EXT.  WILLIAM’S HOUSE - DAY  
  William kicks the dog as it growls. 
INT.  JOE'S BARN - LOFT - DAY 
  William throws his sandwich at the dog.  
The only time to use a Transition in a spec sc ript is if it's 
necessary to propel your story.  
For exam
ple, you might use a TIME CUT : to indicate 
passage of time. More commonly, a DISSOLVE TO : 
indicates that time has passed.  
Or
, you might need to use MATCH CUT:  if you want to 
illustrate that there is some corr elation between something 
we just saw an d something in the new scene. Don't use 
these things unless absolutely necessary, because the 
director of the film will probably think of something different.  
Most t ransitions are already programmed into our 
screenwr iting program , capitalized and lined up for those 
rare occasions when you can't resist to use one.  


--- PAGE 24 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
17 Plato puts on a fairy costume and started 
running up and down the office stairs, until he disappeared. 
 CUT TO: 
Remem ber, the Cut  To: will probably be left out in most s pec 
scripts these days. What it indicates is  a complete change of 
location. By seeing the next slugline it will be assumed that 
you have CUT TO. it’s good to learn the process.  
•SHO
TS
Shots are formatted like Scene  Headings, flush left margin,
all upperc ase. Blank line before and after.
A S
HOT tells the reader the focal point within a scene has 
changed. Here are some examples of shots:  
•ANG
LE ON -- - 
•EXTREME CLOSE UP -- - 
•PAN TO --       (BE CAREFUL Not to Direct) 
•FRANKIE'S POV -- - 
• R EVERSE ANGLE -- - 
As
 the writer, for reasons already mentioned you should be 
very careful  using a SHOT to redirect the reader's focus. 
Your "directing" runs the risk of interrupting the flow of your  
storytellin g. Like we always say, If what you reall y want to do 
is direct films, don’t  do it in a script you're trying to sell...  
If
 you are describing a crazy situation , with a your lead 
character threatening  a bodyguard with a soiled diaper , and 
you want the audience to see a sharpshooter aiming at the  
your crazed character , you might use a shot like this:  
WILL’S POV - Will shoves a SOILED DIAPER against the face of STOOP’S BODYGUARD. 
WILL ROBINSON 
(trembling) 
I'll soil him! I mean it. 

--- PAGE 25 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
18  
SAMMY STOOPS 
Take him out! Now! Do it! 
 
ANGLE ON - BODYGAURD TWO  A SHARP-SHOOTER  
As he lines up the shot, finger poised on the trigger. 
 
WILL ROBINSON 
I want to talk to the Sally. NOW! 
 
Another shot used from time to time is INSERT . It is used 
solely as a direction - to focus on something vital  to the 
scene, often s omething that the audience needs to read or 
what would otherwise be too small to be seen in a scene.  
 
INSERT – WILL’S LOVE NOTE 
 •  MONTAGES  
A MONTAGE is a cinematic device used to show a series of scenes , all relate d and building to some conclusion. 
Altho ugh a French word, it was created by Russian director 
Sergei Eisenstein as a "montage of attractions" to elicit emotions on several levels. Most often it is used as a 
passage of time device. For example:  
 
MONTAGE 1) Will is born. Handed over to his mom. 
2) Will rolls over in his playpen. 3) Will takes a deep breath, soils dad. 
4) Will throws a poopy diaper at Sammy. 
 
You can also number the scenes A), B), C) if you prefer. 
Either numbering format is correc t.  The MONT AGE is 
formatted as a single shot, with th e subsequent scenes 
action elements of the complete sequence. It isn't necessary, but some times we write END OF MONTAGE when the 
montage is completed.  
 