

--- PAGE 126 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
119 
 Continuing Dia logue  
Dialog ue spoken by the same character that continues 
uninterrupted onto the next page, marked with a (cont'd) in a 
stage play.  
Continuous Action 
Included in the scene heading when moving from one scene to the next, as the action continues.  
Copyright  
Proof of ownership of an artistic property that comes with registering your script through the United States Register of Copyrights.  
Copy right Notice  
Placing © Your Name on the Title Page of a script.  
Courier 12 pi tch 
The main font in use in the U.S. by both publishers and the Hollywood film industry.  
Coverage  
The notes prepared by script readers at literary agency, film production company,  theater company or script competition. 
Coverage is typically divided into th ree sections: plot synopsis, 
evaluation / discussion o f the quality of the writing, and a 
recommendation that either passes on the script or kicks it on to the next level. Typically, coverage is for internal use and almost never shared with the writer.  
Creative Exec 
An individual that reviews literary material to determine whether 
a studio or company, etc. is interested in optioning or buy ing it. 
This person is usually next in line after a reader. They also will 
generally help to oversee the further devel opme nt of a project 
once it is optioned or purchased providing the writer with 
feedback, suggestions, and changes for rewrites.  
D-Girl  
An outdated and somewhat sexist term that refers to (in the 
early days) the women who would read scripts and evaluate 
them for producers, directors, etc. Today men and women 
serve in this roll of looking at scripts for purchasing 
consideration as well as developing (the "D") the material further by working with the writer and giving notes & suggestions on how to "improve" it.  

--- PAGE 127 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
120 
 Development  
The process of preparing a script for production.  
Development Hell  
The dreaded creative death malaise that occurs when the 
development process lasts too long.  
Dialogu e 
The speeches between characters in a film or a play.  
Dialogue P ass   
When a w riter focuses only on rewriting or "polishing" the 
dialogue in a draft of a script.  
Direct Solicitation  
When a theater contacts a playwright or his agent about submitting a script. Theaters that use this method typically do not want the playwright to i nitiate the contact.  
Draft  
A version of a play. Each draft of rewrites/revisions should be numbered differently.  
Dual Dialog  
When two characters speak simultaneously  
Emphasized Dial ogue  
Dialogue that the playwright wants stressed, usually identified with ita lics. 
Establishing Shot  
A cinematic shot that establishes a certain location or area.  
Exposition  
The first act of a dramatic structure, in which the main conflict and characters are "exposed" or revealed. Also, any information about the characters, confl ict or world of the play.  
EXT.  
Outdoors.  
Extension  
A tec hnical note placed directly to the right of the Character 
name that denotes HOW the character's voice is heard. For example, O.S. is an extension that stands for Off -Screen.  

--- PAGE 128 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
121 
 f.g. 
Abbreviation for "for eground" (i.e. In the f.g., kids are fighting).  
Feature Film  
A movie made primarily for distribution in theaters.  
Film Festival  
A festival of short and/or feature- length films shown over the 
course of between a few days to a few weeks. Festivals are 
places  for films and filmmakers – particularly in the case of 
independent films – to gain exposure and critical buzz and, in 
many cases, distribution. Perhaps the two best -known festivals  
in the world are Sundance and Cannes.  
First Look Deal  
An arrangement either a company or in some cases an 
individual a s with a studio, in which they must allow the studio 
the first right of refusal on purchasing and or producing a 
project the individual or company is interested in. If the studio passes, the project can then be " shopped" around to other 
interested parties.  
FLASHBACK  
A scene from the past that interrupts the action to explain 
motivation or reaction of a character to the immediate scene.  
Font  
The look of the printed text on the page. For screenplays, Courier 12 point is the standard (a fixed font which in practical 
terms  means that an l or an m, although the m being wider, 
occupy the same width of space).  
Formula  
More commonly used in the world of film than for describing the stage, it usually refers to a "sure- fire" method of structuring a 
script (i.e. it must include certain elements and arrive at a certain 
ending). For example, there have been a slew of movies where a 
group of misfits are t hrown together and ultimately become the 
David that slays Goliath on the at hletic field (e.g.  The Bad News 
Bears ). 
FREEZE FRAME  
The image on the screen stops, freezes and becomes a still 
shot.  

--- PAGE 129 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
122 Full-Length Play  
Also known as an Evening Length Play, a play that constitutes a 
full evening of theater.  
Genre  
The category a story or sc ript falls into - such as: thriller, 
romanti c comedy, action, screwball comedy  
Green Light  
A project has gotten the go ahead for production.  
Header  
An element of a Production Script  occupying the same line as 
the page number, which is on the right and .5" fr om the top. 
Printed on every script page, header infor mation includes the 
date of a revision and the color of the page.  
Heat  
Positive gossip about a project on the Hollywood grape vine.  
High concept  
A movie's basic idea that is felt to have never been done. 
Hip pocket  
A causal  relationship with an established agent in lieu of a 
signed, formal agreement of representation.  
Hook  
A term borrowed from songwriting that describes that thing that catches the public's attention and keeps them interested in the flow of a story.  
In the Round 
A type of theater space in which the audience is, usually in a circular configuration, on all sides of the playing area.  
Indie  
A production company independent of major film studio financing.  
INT. 
Indoors.  
Intercut  
A script instru ction denoting that the action moves back and forth 

--- PAGE 130 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
123 
 betw een two or more scenes.  
Interrupt  
When one character cuts off another character's dialogue, 
sometimes marked with an ... but better marked with an em dash (--). 
Left 
On stage, the actors' left, assumi ng they are facing the audience. 
Short for Stage Left.  
Lights Fade  
A common stage direction to end a scene or an act.  
Line Reading  
When a director or playwright gives an actor a specific way to perform a line of dialogue.  
Locked Pages  
A software term for f inalized screenplay pages that are handed 
out to the department heads and talent in preparation for production.  
Logline  
A "25 words or less" description of a screenplay.  
Lyrics  
The words that are sung by characters in a musical.  
M.O.S.  
Without sound, so descri bed because a German- born director 
wanti ng a scene w ith no sound told the crew to shoot "mit out 
sound."  
Manuscript  
A script before it has been published.  
Manuscript Format  
The ideal submission format in the United States and in a 
number of other count ries, with character names centered and 
CAPS before their dialogue, and indented stage directions.  
Master Scene Script  
A script formatted without scene numbering (the usual format f or 
a spec screenplay).  

--- PAGE 131 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
124 
 Match Cut  
A transition in which something in the scene t hat follows in some 
way directly matches  a character  or object in the previous scene.  
Miniseries  
A long- form movie of three hours or more shown on successive 
nights or weeks on U.S. television networks.  
Montage  
A cinematic device used to show a series of  scenes, all related 
and building to some conclusion.  
Movie of the Week  
Also known as an "MOW," a movie made primarily for broadcast 
on a television or cable network.  
Multimedia  
Writing and filmmaking encompassing more than one medium at 
a time which, sc ript-wise, usually refers to CD -ROM games or  
Internet -based programming.  
Multiple Casting  
When an actor plays more than one character.  
Musical  
A play in which songs and music are an integral part of the 
dramatic structure.  
Musical Numbers Page  
A page in a musical script, usually following the Cast P age, that 
lists the musical numbers, divided by act, and the characters that sing in them.  
Notes  
Ideas about a screenplay shared with a s creenwriter by 
someone responsible for moving the script forward into product ion, which the screenwriter is generally expected to use 
to revise the screenplay.  
Numbered Scenes  
Numbers that appear to the right and left of the scene heading to aid the Assis tant Director in breaking down the scenes for 
scheduling and production.  
 

--- PAGE 132 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
125 
 O.C. 
Abbreviation for Off Camera, denoting that the speak er is 
resident within the scene but not seen by the camera.  
O.S. 
Abbreviation for Off Screen, denoting that the speaker is not 
resident within the scene.  
Off 
Short for offstage. Typically written as ( off) next to a character 
name when a character speaking dialogue is offstage while she speaks.  
One-hour Episodic  
A screenplay for a television show whose episodes fill a one-hour time slot, week to week.  
Opening Credits  
Onscreen text describing the most im portant people involved in 
the making of a m ovie.  
Option  
The securing of the rights to a screenplay for a given length of time.  
Outline  
A scene by scene breakdown/list of the story of a script. 
Shows each point and beat.  
Package  
The assembly of the basic ele ments necessary to secure 
financing for a film.  
PAN  
A camera direction indicating a stationary camera that pivots 
back and forth or up and down.  
Parenthetical  
Also known as a "wryly" because of the propensity of amateur 
screenwriters to try to accent a c haracter's speech -- as in BOB 
(wryly) -- an inflection to a speech noted by a writer. Of course, 
in stage plays, all stage directions (at least in Manuscript Format) 
are in parentheses, but "directing off the page," as it's often 
called, is equally frowned u pon. 

--- PAGE 133 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
126 
 Pass  
A rejection of a property by a potential producer or an agent.  
Pitch  
To verbally describe a property to a potential buyer in the hope it 
will be bought.  
Play 
Sometimes known as a stage play, it's a production which is meant to be performed on st age in front of a live audience.  
Playwrigh t 
A person who writes stage plays.  
Playwriting  
The craft or act of writing scripts for the stage (i.e. the live theater).  
Points  
Percentage participation in the profits of a film.  
Polish  
In theory, to rewrite a few  scenes in a script to improve them. In 
practice, a screenwriter is often expected to do a complete 
rewrite of a script for the price of a polish.  
POV  
Point of View; a camera angle placed so as to seem the camera is the eyes of a character.  
Producer  
The pers on or entity financially responsible for  a stage or film 
production.  
Production Script  
A script in which no more major changes or rewrites is anticipated to occur, which is used day by day for filming on a 
movie set.  
Professional Recommendation 
A method of  submission in which a writer may submit  a full script 
if it's accompanied by a theater professional (typically a literary manager or artistic director, though sometimes a direc tor is 
acceptable as well).  

--- PAGE 134 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
127 Property  
Any intellectual property in any form (inc luding a play or 
screenplay) that might form the basis of a movie. In theater, 
usually called a "prop," an item (e.g. a gun, spoon, hairbrush, etc.) that can held by one of the characters.  
Query  
A method of submission in which a writer approaches a theat er 
with a brief letter, accompanied by a synopsis and sample 
pages.  
Reader (aka Script Reader)  
A person who reads screenplays for a production company or stage plays  for a theater  company and writes a report about 
them, often being paid per report.  
Reading  
A "performance" of a play in which the actors are scr ipt-in-hand. 
It could either take place around a table (called a "table reading") or with some blocking or staging (a "staged reading").  
Register of Copyrights  
The US government office that registers int ellectual property 
(e.g. scripts), necessary prior to filing a claim for copyright infringement in court.  
Release  
A legal document given to unrepresented writers for signing by agents, producers or production companies, absolving said 
entities of legal lia bility. 
Resolution  
The third act of a dramatic struct ure, in which the conflict comes 
to some kind of conclusion: the protagonist either gets it or doesn't.  
Reversal  
A place in the plot where a character achieves the opposite of his aim, resulting in a cha nge from good fortune to bad fortune.  
Revised Pages  
Changes are made to the script after the initial circulation of the 
Production Script, which are different in color and incorporated into the script without displacing or rearranging the original, unrevised  pages.  

--- PAGE 135 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
128 
 Right 
On stage, the actors' right, assuming they are facing the 
audience. Short for Stage Right.  
Romantic comedy  
Also known as a "romcom," a comedic movie in which the main 
story revolves  around a romance.  
Scene  
Action taking place in one locatio n and in a distinct time that 
(hopefully)  moves the story to the next element of the story.  
Scene Heading  
A short description of the location and time of day of a scene, also known as a "slugline." For example: EXT. MOUNTAIN CABIN - DAY would denote that t he action takes place outside a 
mountain cabin during daylight hours.  
Screening  
The showing of a film for test audiences or people involved.  
Screenplay Contest  
A submission opportunity for screenwriters in which a group of readers (judges) select one or more  winners from the entered 
scripts. Typi cally, contests require entry fees that may be as high 
as $40- $50, but can often result in prizes as high as $20,000 or 
more for the winner(s), as well as important exposure to agents and production companies. Some “f ellowship” opportunities 
effectively fu nction as contests (e.g. Nicholl), choosing a handful 
of fellows (i.e. winners) from the pool of entrants.  
Screenwriter  
The most important and most abused person in Hollywood. The screenwriter writes the script that  provides the foundation for the 
film, th ough it may go through any number of changes, both in 
the rewriting process before production, during production, and 
in the editing process afterward. While in the world of theater, 
there is usually only one playwr ight on any given play (or one 
collaborat ive team), in film there may be many screenwriters 
throughout the life of a project.  
Screenwriting  
The art of writing scripts for a visual medium.  
Script  

--- PAGE 136 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
129 
 The blueprint or roadmap that outlines a movie story through 
visual descriptions, actions of characters and their dialogue. The 
term "script" also applies to stageplays as well.  
Script cover  
What protects the script on its travels between the writer and its 
many potential readers. The Writers Store carries a number of  
acceptable covers.  
Script Writing Software  
Computer software designed specifically to format and aid in the 
writing of screenplays and teleplays.  
Securely Bound Script  
Typical ly, a stage play  contest's request that a script be more 
firmly bound than brads will do. Either it is literally bound,  or it is 
securely held in a folder.  
Set 
The physical elements that are constructed or arranged to create a sense of place.  
Setting  
The time and place of a play or screenplay.  
SFX 
Abbreviation for Sound Effects.  
Shooting  Script  
A script that has been prepared to be put into production.  
Shot 
What the camera sees. For example, TRACKING SHOT would mean that the camera is following a character or character as he walks in a scene. WIDE SHOT would mean that we see every chara cter that appears in the scene, all at  once.  
Showrunner  
A writer/producer ultimately responsible for the production of a TV series, week to week.  
Simultaneous Dialogue  
When two characters speak at the same time, written in two columns side by side.  

--- PAGE 137 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
130 
 Situation  comedy  
Also known as a "sitcom," a normally 30- minute (in the United 
States) comedic television show revolving around funny 
situations the main characters repeatedly fall i nto. 
Slugline  
Another name for the SCENE HEADING  
SMASH CUT  
A quick or sudden cut from one scene to another.  
Soap Opera  
Daytime dramas so named because they were originally sponsored by the makers of laundry detergent in the early days of television.  
Spec S cript  
A script written without being commissioned on the speculative hope that it  will be sold.  
SPFX  
Abbreviation for S pecial Effec ts. 
Split Screen  
A screen with different scenes taking place in two or more 
sections; the scenes are usually interactive, as in the depiction of 
two sides of a phone conversation.  
Stock Shot 
A sequence of  film previously shot and available for purchase 
and use from a film library.  
Submission 
Name for a script once it is submitted to producers or agents.  
Suggested Setting  
A setti ng on stage in which a few set pieces or lighting or other 
technical elements t ake the place of elaborate set construct ion. 
SUPER  
Abbreviation for "superimpose" meaning the laying one image on 
top of another, usually words over a filmed scene (i.e. Berlin,  
1945).  
 

--- PAGE 138 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
131 
 Synopsis  
A two to three page, double -spaced description of a screenplay.  
Tag 
A short scene at the end of a movie that usually provides some 
upbeat addition to the climax.  
Technical Demands  
The extent to which a play requires specific lighting, sound, sets, 
etc. Plays with minimal technical demands are easier and less 
expensi ve to produce.  
Ten-Minute Play  
A complet e play, with  a beginning, middle and end, designed to 
play in ten minutes.  
The Business  
Show business in general; more specifically, Holl ywood 
moviemaking and television business.  
Thriller  
A fast -paced, high stakes c rime story in which the protagonist is 
generally in danger at every turn, with the most danger coming in 
the final confrontation with the antagonist.  
Ticking Clock  
A dramatic device in which some event looming in the near future requires that the conflict re ach a speedy resolution (hence, 
the ti cking clock) . 
TITLE  
Text that appears onscreen denoting a key element of the movie.  
Title Page  
A page of the script that contains the title and the author's contact information.  
Touring Play  
A play with minimal techn ical demands that is meant to be easily 
packed up and moved from one performance space to another.  
 
 

--- PAGE 139 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
132 Transition  
A script notation denoting an editing transition within the telli ng of 
a story. For example, DISSOLVE TO: means the action seems 
to blur and ref ocus  into another scene, and is generally used to 
denote a passage of time.  
Treatment  
A scene by scene description of a screenplay, minus all or most of the dialogue.  
Tweak  
A minor change made in a scene or portion of a screenplay . 
Unsolicited Script  
A met hod of script submission in which the writer sends t he 
script, without prior contact, to the theater or production 
company. Some theaters allow this, most don't -and very few fil m 
production companies, for liability reasons, can read unsolicited 
materials.  
V.O.
Abbreviation for Voice Over, denoting that the speaker is narrating the action onscreen.  
WGA Signatory  
An agent, producer or production company that has signed an agreement  to abide by established agreements with the Writers 
Guild of America.  
Workshop 
A developmental "production" of a play,  with a significant amount 
of rehearsal, but with less fully realized production values (e.g. set) than a full production.  
Writers Guild of America  
Also known as "the WGA." The main union for screenwriters in the Uni ted States, with chapters in Los Angeles  (WGAw) and 
New York (WGAe).  
REFERENCES  
* Trottier, David: "The Screenwriter's Bible", pp. 5– 7. Silman James, 1998.
** Excerpt  on the three -act structure from Yves Lavandier's Writing Drama
*** Excerpt Text is avail able under the Creative Commons Attribut ion-ShareAli ke License;
  Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc..  
****Excerpts from Melanie Anne Phillips “Writing Characters of the Opposite Sex,” available 
on audio  CD or audio c assette at http://store.yahoo.com/dram atica/writch arofop.html  

--- PAGE 140 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
133 
 E X T R A   L U G G A G E  
 
PULLING IT ALL TOGETHER  
You want me to re -write my script?  
The process of rewriting is recreating. Rewriting is technically every 
change you make to your draft. Rew riting is not cutting and pasting. It's 
not reading through your draft on your computer screen and changing 
words. It's not pushing your cursor down the page, highlighting text and 
deleting it. I think this is called editing or deleting or garbage time or easy 
on the damn brain, but it's not cal led rewritin g over in the bust your ass 
capital of screenplay planet.  
Rewriting is almost starting completely over. It's almost accepting  that 
you have nothing after celebrating like you won your tenth super bowl simply  by typing the end and poking two bra ss fasteners through a pile of 
paper.  
 Rewriting is taking that pile of paper, plopping it beside you where you 
can see it without a lot  of movement of the head, and copying it over with 
an industrious attitude. O kay, basically if you open a new file and name it 
second draft, or seventh, or  whatever, lie all you want, but if you simply 
copy it over and the only thing that gets changed is the things that make 
you physically jerk in your chair, then you are not rewr iting with an 
industrious attitude.   An industrious  attitude can mean a lot of things, I will probably call it 
something else next week, but it simply means you are open to work,  
and with a rewrite, the premise to work is the belief your script needs work . If you can't see much wrong, how can i t need a lot  of work, and 
how is the rewrite going to work? It won't. So make sure you have an open bent, and start typing it over.  
 What h appens?  A lot of screenwriters won't even admit it they've never 
done it, beca use it breaks your neck. If you have d one it, it's  almost time 
we did it again. Now, how do I find out what's broken? It's not all on one 
page, and it's hard to see the big picture of the awful thing. Well, this isn't 
a book, this is just a short essay, so  here's a short list of tools to get 
yourself into and ready for your rewrite.  
 First, you got ask yourself, what's the story, or more specifically, what are the stories? I usually make up a list of sentences that start with "The 
story of..." and fill in  the blanks. What are the stories that are  emerging 
from your current draft? What does your spirit want to tell versus what 
your poor brain thought you were going to do back in the coffee shop? 

--- PAGE 141 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
134 
 You might find the list is long, and that's a problem, too. Th ere's usually a 
main one, maybe one close behind, then a few tiny sweet ones. There is 
your family of stories. There they are. Now, how are you treating them?  
 
This is where you can make some kind of a chart. Like a spreadsheet or something. Or the back of a dry cleaning receipt will do. Divide up  your 
script into the beginning, act one, act two, act three, and the finish. By 
the way, I know there are all sorts of act divisions. Modify my directions 
at your will. It's fine. So within this chart you will penci l in the beats that 
exist within the cur rent lay out of your script.  
 When you're done charting the arcs of your family of stories, you will undoubtedly find HOLES. Wow. Nothing's there. Didn't see that before. 
Okay, you better put something in there.  Let’s say you got your chart 
pretty ful l, in fact, it looks like the stories of your movie have something 
resembling a beginning, middle and end. Now what you need is to make every scene as good as your best scene. Yeah, terrible news, How do 
you determine this? Grade your scenes. Some scenes might get an A. 
Others maybe a B. Give your work an F or two. Once you do this, you 
will know what scenes are functioning as placeholders and w hat 
moneymakers are. In the end, rewriting is making everything the most 
special ever. Anything short, and you have more rewriting to do; unless 
you can live with an uneven ride.  
 
Finally, a reminder; Screenwriting becomes artful when compression 
arrives. Shorten your everything. All dialogue and description is 
representative of  this life. A screenplay is just another story. 
 
TIPS ON WRITING A SYNOPSIS  
 
It would be very easy to write a synopsis of a successful movie; anyone could do that. But I came across  this case study and I wanted to share it 
with all of you.  
 Below is an example of a synopsis that  I found online, It was successful 
in that it did get requests for the script.  This writer will not take offense if other writers critique it. Of course, the writer is remaining anonymous.  
 This is how the synopsis should look'.  
 From a blitz of query letters (submitted in 1999), this synopsis resulted in 
16 production companies requesting the script in just a few weeks. This writer was not represented at t he time of the blitz.  The script was not 
sold or  optioned because the script was to be perfectly frank, poorly 
written.  

--- PAGE 142 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
135 
 After reading this synopsis, I have come to some conclusions as to why 
so many producers were interested in this unknown writer's script. They 
are as follows:  
 
1. There is always an in terest in a script that can result in many 
more films, based upon the same premise and characters with a 
different situation (franchise potential - like the Bond, Mission 
Impossible, Die Hard, Superman movies , etc).  
 
2. It told the basic idea of the story in  a page or less. (The industry 
standar d for a synopsis is usually one page.)  
 
3. Even an idiot could read it and know what the story was about.  
 
4. The development person or producer could easily pitch the story to others (such as: an American James Bond).  
 
5. It did not contain specific details which would factually require 
further explanation, causing the synopsis to be longer than it 
should be. Nor did it leave the reader wondering what the writer 
meant by a particular paragraph or sentence.  
 
6. It did not unne cessarily complicate the explanation of the story,  
by including every important character or detail in the script . 
 
 
 
Number 1 above, does not apply to all scripts. However, in my opinion , 
2-6 do. Though this synopsis is not the best one ever written and didn't 
really follow the 'beginning, middle and end'  of the writer's scri pt like 
some synopses do, it most certainly told the producer what the story was 
about. Regardless of how it is done, the writer needs to tell the producer 
what the story is about.  
 
There is no question that anyone can look at this synopsis and find 
somet hing to improve. It took restraint on our part not to rewrite the 
synopsis . But as they say , ‘if it ain’t broke, don’t fix i t.' If we had , we 
would be supplying a synopsis that we think would work, rather than one 
that did work.   
 Here is how this writer wrote the synopsis. She wrote several synopses 
for the script. Then the writer had her friend who was an English tutor for 
small children,  critique it to make it understandable and easy to re ad. 
Another concern was to, as much as  possible, m ake it so that each 

--- PAGE 143 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
136 
 paragraph naturally led into the next paragraph (or at least didn't seem 
disjointed).  
 
The test to any decent synopsis is (and these  are IMPORTANT):  
 1. Can the producer easily pitch i t to others? (Don't forget this one.)  
2. From the first quick read, can anyone understand it instantly?  
3. Does it honestly give the producer an accurate picture of the story?  
 If a synopsis does not meet these three requirements, the odds are very great that the synopsis is in trouble. Writers should team up and practice 
writing synopses and loglines. Writers should get their synopses and loglines critiqued (by their peers) before submitting query let ters.  
 
HOW TO WRITE A TREATMENT  
Many writers start with a treatment that they and their representation 
take and shop around town, before they’ve even written their screenplay. 
Nowadays, even if your screenplay is finished, it’s not a bad idea to have 
a treatment on hand in case a producer or director asks to read it before 
they read your script. A lot of the time, they want to read it and see if the 
story is something they want to deal with.  
So, write a 2 –5-page summary that includes the title of your scr eenplay, 
the logline and a list of main characters. Include the beginning, middle 
and end. Make sure to include the main beats and turning points of your story. Anyone who reads it should get a good overview of your story, characters, and style. They shoul d learn enough to feel understanding 
for the characters and want to follow them on their journey. Now you'll also have clear  view of your story.  
Make sure to include your name, contact info, and it’s not a bad idea to 
protect it with a WGA or US copyright  as well.  
FILM TREATMENT FORMAT 
YOU SHOULD INCLUDE THESE IN YOUR FILM 
TREATMENT?  
 
• In terms of formatting, you should write it like a present -
tense short story. Try not to write it like a novel.  

--- PAGE 144 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
137 •Inc
lude your Key Plot Points, the Tone and Genre you are
aimin g for.
•Your treatment does not need to include the whole story,
so leave out the un -important subplots. Just outline your
basic three- act story structure
•DO NOT use screenplay format. Focus on your story andyour main characters.
• 
INCLUDE THESE IN YOUR T REATMENT: 
•The title of your M ovie.
•Your name and contact details.
•Logline . Explain what your story’s about in a couple of
lines.
•Expl
anation of act one.  Where are we? What’s this movie
about? Who are the m ain characters?  What do they want?
What’s the t one? What’s the setup?
•Expl
anation of act two.  What pushes these characters to
change?                                                                    What’s
the conflict? Where’s the story going?
•Expl
anation of act three.  How does the story reach a
resolution? What’s the climax?
•Wrap-up. Where do we leave the characters? What
happens at the very end? Is there an epilogue? { such as a
final chapter at the end of a story that often serves to
reveal the fates of the characters. They can be used to hint
at a sequel or wrap up all the loose ends.)  So, Is  there a
possible  sequel?
Her
e is a link to a plethora  of Treatment Sample s 
https://www.simplyscripts.com/treatments -series -bibles -
guides -proposals.html#treatments  

--- PAGE 145 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
138 
 INDEX  
1. INTRODUCTION         p age 3  
 
 ARE YOU READY FOR THE ROAD?      page 3  
 WHAT IS A SCREENPLAY?       page 4  
 
BASIC SCREENWRITING RULES OF THE ROAD  page 6  
 
 DOES SPELLING COUNT?       page 7  
 SHOULD I MAKE MY SCRIPT STANDOUT?   page 7  
 BASIC SCREENPLAY FORMAT      page 8  
 SLUGLIN ES         page 10  
 ABBREVIATIONS         page 10  
 PARENTHETICALS        page 11  
 Scene numbers         page 13  
 THE LENGTH OF A SCREENPLA Y    page 13  
 BASIC STYLE          page 14  
 
 NO CAMERA DIRECTION       page 14  
 CUT TO’S & TRANSITIONS       page 15  
 SHOTS           page 17 
 MONTAGES          page 18 
 SOME OTH ER FORMAT WARNINGS     page 19  
 SCREENWRITING SOFTWARE      page 20  
 
 Example: COV ER PAGE TRAD. GUIDELINES   page 21  
 Example: COVER PAGE NEW STYLE GUIDELINES  page 22  
 Example: FORMAT PAGE MARGINS 1     page 23 
 Exampl e: FORMAT PAGE MARGINS 2     p age 24 
 SOME  OTHER FORMAT WARNINGS     page 19  
 FORMAT - CAPITALIZATION AND SPACING   page 25  
  Margins of Screenplay Elements       page 25  
 PAGE MARGINS         page 25  
 Spacing           page 25  
 PAGE NUMBERS         p age 25 
 SCENE NUMBERS          page 25  

--- PAGE 146 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
139 
  F ORMATING THE  SCENE       page 25  
 SCENE ELEMENTS        page 26  
 SCENE HEADING         page 27  
 
 ACTION LINE          page 28  
 CHARACTER         page 28  
 DIALOGUE          page 28  
 PRINTING YOUR SCREENPLAY      page 29  
 
2. WHAT’S Y OUR STORY         page 31  
 
 W HAT MAKES FO R A GOOD STORY?    P age 31  
 YOU NEED A HOOK        page 33  
 WHAT HOLLYWOOD BUYS       page 34  
 PARTS OF A HOOK        page 35  
 ABOUT PITCHING YOUR MOVIE IDEA.    page 36  
 
3. THE JOURNEY          page 38  
 STOR Y CONCEPT         page 38  
 STORY GENRE         page 33  
 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GENRE AND STYLE?   page 40  
 STORY TYPE          page 40  
 NARATIV ES         page 40  
 TYPES OF NARRATIVES:       page 41  
 YOUR WORLD CREATION       page 44  
 YOUR STORY CREATION      page 44  
 PLOT KEYW ORDS         page 45  
    4. TH E THREE ACT ROAD  (3 act structure)    page 47  
 YOUR STORY CHECKLIST       page 49  
 PLANNING YOUR WORLD       page 51  
    5. CREATING CHARACTER       page 52  
 CHARACTER  DEVELOPMENT PART 1    page 52  
 CHARACTERS THOUGHTS       page 5 2 
 C
HARACTER  DEVELOPMENT PAR T 1   page 5 2 
 CHARACTERS THOUGHTS       page 52  
 INTERVIEW YOUR CHARACTER    page 54  

--- PAGE 147 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
140 
  CHARACTER NAMES       page 57  
  ARISTOTLE THE 1ST SCREENWRITER   page 59  
 ARIST OTLE’S SIX COMPONENTS OF DRAMA  page 59  
 CHARACTER TY PES      page 61 
   CHARACTER  DEVELOPMENT PART 1   p age 52 
 CHARACTERS THOUGHTS      page 52  
    CHARACTER  DEVELOPMENT PART 2   page 62  
 CHARACTERS ARCS       page 62  
          CHARACTERS OF THE OPPOSITE SEX  page 63  
 HEROES & VILLAINS       page 67  
 WRITE FRO M YOUR HUNG ER    page 70  
 WHAT IS A 'BEAT'?       page 71 
 WHAT IS A 'VOICE OVER?      page 71  
 FLASHBACKS        page 73  
 
6. PROTECTING M Y WORK       page 73  
 MAINTAIN A CREATIVE TRAIL     page 74  
 IDEA S BELONG TO EVERYONE (SORT OF)  page 74  
 STATUTORY PROTECTI ON     page 77 
 WHAT IS A COPYRIGHT?      page 77  
 W HO CAN CLAIM COPYRIGHT?     page 77  
 COPYRIGHT FORMS       page 79  
 ELECTRONIC COPYRI GHT OFFICE    page 84  
 
7. AGREEMENTS         page 85  
 COLLABORATION AGREEMENTS    page 85  
 NON- DISCLOSURE AGREEMENT (SIMPLE)   page 86 
 NON- DISCL OSURE AGREEMENT (DET AILED)  page 87 
 EXAMPLE OF A SYNOPSIS     page 90  
 EXAMPLE OF A QUERY LETTER     page 91  
 WHAT IS A COPYRIGHT?      page 33  
 8. YOUR SCREENWRITERS ROAD TESTS   page 93  
 EXERCISE: 1 - SCRIPT THEME – Your Life   page 94  
 E XERCISE: 2 - Pitch, Pitch , Pitch!       page 96  
 E XERCISE: 3 - CRISS -CROSS     page 97  
 EXER
CISE: 4 - Your Pitch Worksheet    page 98  
 EXERCISE: 5 - Three Act Structure    page 100  

--- PAGE 148 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
141 
  EXERCISE: 6 - Power Structure     page 102  
 EXERCISE: 7 - WHAT JUST HAPPENED?   page 103 
 
9. SIGNATORY LITERARY AGENCIES    page 1 04 
 LIST OF AGENCIES       page 104- 114 
  SCRIPT RESOURCES       page 114  
 SITES FOR SCREENWRITERS     page 114  
      
10. GLOSSARY OF WORDS & TERMS    page 115  
 
 EXTRA LUGGAGE        page 133  
 PULLING IT ALL TOGE THER    page 133  
 TIPS ON WRITING A S YNOPSIS     p age 135  
 H OW TO WRITE A TREATMENT     page 136  
INDEX          page 137  
ABOUT THE AUTHORS       page 142 

--- PAGE 149 ---

142 ABOUT THE AUTHOR S 
 
Rich Goteri  
Rich was The Artistic Director of The Second City Detroit's Training 
Center/Conser vatory program for ten years . For the last  thirty years he 
has dedicated himself to the performing arts as an actor, writer,  director 
and teacher. As an actor Rich has performed in hundreds of improv 
shows and has appeared worldwide in over eighty five 
professional  plays. TV and F ilm credits include: *61, Real Steel, Mach ine 
Gun Preacher, SNL, Silk Stalking’s and Setup with Bru ce Willis,  to name 
a few. Directing credits include: The National Touring Company, 
Homeless For The Holidays and No Way Jose Canseco for The Second 
City. Wri ting Credits include: SNL, Filmfest 7 with The Second City and 
numerous films and plays.  His book on improv comedy Something From 
Nothing published by Crazy House Books is available worldwide in eight 
different languages.   Rich is also one of the nation’s leading 
acting/improv/writing coaches.  He is renowned for transforming his 
students' acting and writing abilities to create outstanding results.  His 
students are  working in all fields of the entertainment business from  
Hollywood TV shows,  major feature f ilms, and on stages throughout the 
world.  He has appeared countless times on TV being interviewed about 
his work on all the major networks and has been featured in The Detroit 
News, The Free Press, The Oakland Press, The New York D aily News, 
The New York T imes, L.A. News, Encore Magazine, The Examiner, Matt 
Horn's column in Britain and in various publications worldwide.   
For further references  visit Rich’s Internet Movie Data Base page  at: 
 
https://www.imdb.com/name/nm0331772/  
 
Mike Mili 
Michael Mili is a storyteller who loves to write about the tiny details t hat 
comprise our everyday lives. In his novel Cigarette Money, a 1960’s 
mafia coming of age story, Michael is able to bring to the reader a 
collection of interesting characters that he has been accumulating his 
entire life. Born in Detroit, to Greek Cypriot parents, Michael is a working 
actor, writer , artist and producer. Michael’s first lead role in movie was 
portraying a hit man in Daniel Casey’s award winning film, The Death of 
Michael Smith. Michael also received credits in such as films Amanda & 
The Fox,  Setup, Intent, Guns, Drugs & Dirty Money and Demon Equation 
just to nam e a few. Recently Michael and long time co- writer, Rich Goteri 
were hired by Frank Roche of Roche Productions to re -write and develop 
his story "The Italy Boys" which is set for production.    
For further references  visit Mike’s  Internet Movie Data Base page  at: 
 
https://www.imdb.com/name/nm1102023/  

--- PAGE 150 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
143 
