

--- PAGE 51 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
44 • Bobby commi ts suicide by Police
• Narrator  tell Bobby's story to police and Mary.
• Narrator  explains to the viewers that it was all a lie.
• False Ending One
• False Ending Two
• Roll Cred its
• Revelation of the bearer  bond on the car s eat.
• Real Ending
SET
TING  
  Time and loc ation where  events of a story take place.  
• Morning
• Narrator’s car interior
• Narrator’s car exterior
• City street
• Freeway
• Outside of car
• Talking to police Mary by the car
• South American bank
• Mary’s mailbox
4.YO
UR WORLD  CREATION
 Now from the choices you made, begin to describe 
the key elements of your story - T he characters that 
will populate the world you are creating, and the 
locations and places  in which the plot unfolds.  Think 
of the game SIM CITY. You s tart with a blank slate 
and begin creating an infras tructure.  
5.YO
UR STORY CREATION
Begin to tell your tale. Break your story into bite-
sized chunks, and begin to stretch your concept intoa recognizable story form.

--- PAGE 52 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
45 
 6. PLOT KEYWORDS  
These are structure  points call ed keywords 
regarding objects and occurr ence s in each film . If 
you know the back to the future story, you could 
drop these right on your timeline like pins on a map. 
Do the same for your story. In this day and age, 
Internet Movie Database uses them for the ir search 
engine.  
 
EX: MOVIE EXAMPLE:  BACK T O THE FUTURE   
Time Machine  
DeLorean  
Future 
Lightning Mad Scientist  
Small Town  
Clock Tower  
High School  
Plutonium  
Year 1985 Clock  
Reference To Chuck Berry  
Spit Take  
Coonskin Cap 
Tearing A Page Out Of A Phone Book  
Breakfast Machine  
Mother Son Relationshi p 
Person In Car Trunk  
Parking Lot  
Cafeteria Interrupted Kiss  
Malt Shop  
555 Phone Number  
Geek  
First Kiss  
1950s  
Sliding Glass Down Bar 
Race Against Time  
Girl Next Door  
Video Camera  Helicopter  
Mistaken Ident ity 
Hanging From Clock  
Family Relationships  
Chase Scale Model Of City  
Slow Motion Scene Automobile Dog 
Altering History  
Reference To Darth Vader Diner Pepsi  
Computer Cracker 
Waking Up In Strange 
Surroundings  
School Dance  
Picture  
Inventor  
Castle Thunder  
Pay Phone  
Self-Worth  
Thunderstorm  
Digital Watch  
Part Of  Trilogy 
Underage Drinking 
Terrorist  
Car Trouble 
Fire Extinguisher  
Rube Goldberg Machine  
Self-Fulfillment  
Bulletproof Vest  Telescope Shotgun  
Bicycle  
Band Lifting Someone Into The Air  
Bully  
Suburbia Peeping Tom  
Produc t Placement  
Falling From A Tree  
Irish Am erican 
Time Travel  
Hit By Car  
1980s  
Four Word Title  
Photograph Love At First Sight  
Dysfunctional Family  
Jeep First Of Series 
Manure 
Barn  
Toyota  
Battle Of The Bands  
Unwant ed Kiss  
Urban  
Reference To Pepsi  
Tel
evision News  
Husband Wife Relationship  
Destiny  
Political Campaign  
Reversal Of Fortune  

--- PAGE 53 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
46 
 Flying Car  
Father Son 
Relationship  
Shopping Mall  
Reagan On Television  
First Date  
Cult Film  
Year 1955 Kiss Reveals Absence Of Love Television  
Nuclear Power  
Audio Feedbac k 
Alternate History Paradox  
Suburb Remote Control Car  Sequel Mentioned 
During End Credits  
 Guitar  
Fire 
Reference To Ronald Reagan  
Crush  
Racial Slur  
Skateboard Reference To Jerry Lewis  
Lifting A Male Into The Air 
Butt Grab  
Bully Comeuppance  
Blockbuster  
Teenage Boy  
Underwear  
Title Spoken By Character 
Surpris e Ending
 
 
    
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   

--- PAGE 54 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
47 
4.THE
 THREE ACT ROAD
THE
 FIRST ACT  - is usually used for exposition, to establish 
the main characters, their relationships and the world they 
live in. Later in the firs t act, a dyn amic, on -screen incident 
occurs that confr onts the main character (the protagonist), 
whose attempts to deal with this incident lead to a second 
and more dramatic situation, known as the first turning point, 
which will: 
(a) S ignal
s the end of the first act ,
(b)Life will never be the same again for the protagonist .
(c) R aises a question that will be revealed by  the climax .
The 
dramatic question should be framed in terms of the 
protagonist's call to action, (Will X recover the diamond? Will Y get the gir l? Will Z capture the killer?).This is k nown  as the 
inciting incident, or catalyst. As an example, the inciting 

--- PAGE 55 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
48 
 incident in the 1972 film The Godfather is when Vito 
Corleone is shot, which occurs approximately 40 minutes into the film.  
 THE SEC OND ACT  - also referred to as "rising action", 
typically depicts the protagonist's attempt to resolve the 
problem initiated by the first turning point, only to find his - or 
herself in increasingly worse situations. Part of  the reason 
protagonists seem unable to resolve their problems is because they do not yet have the skills to deal with the 
forces of antagonism that confront them. They must not only learn new skills but arrive at a higher sense of awareness of 
who they ar e and what they are capable of, in order to de al 
with their predicament, which in turn  changes who they are. 
This is referred to as character development. This cannot be 
achieved alone and they are usually aided and abetted by 
mentors and co- protagonists.  
 
THE THIRD ACT  - features the resolution of the story and its 
subplots. The climax, al so known as the second turning 
point, is the scene or sequence in which the main tensions of 
the story are brought to their most intense point and the dramatic question answered, leaving the protagonist and other characters with a new sense of who they really are. *** 
 
As you look  at this 3 act structure , try to understand it is not 
gospel and it has been interpreted a zillion different ways…  
You should use it like a GPS to help you get to where you 
are going, but do n’t be afraid to deviate from the path and t ry 
new things… Don’t let charts and rules let you lose  sight of 
the most important thing. TELLING YOUR STORY!  
  

--- PAGE 56 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
49 Here is a nifty tool to start you on 
your writing journey.  
YOUR 
SCRIPT / STORY 
CHECK LI ST 
Here are twelve  great questions 
you should ask yo urself about your script  / story while you 
are developing it . You should actually chart it out.  
1) Wh
at are the elements of my story?
• What is my story’s concept ?
• What Genre is my story?
2) Wha
t do I want to say with my script or story?
• The state of t he w orld?
• Relationships?
• Governments?
• Religions?
• Life in general?
• People?
3)
How will audiences or readers react to my story?
• Interesting?
• Believable? Is it a tru e story?
• Credible?
• Compelling?
4) Whe
re doe s my story begin?
• What is the set up?
• Is the protagonist in a crisis?
• Have you established your world? The rules?
• The restrictions?
5)Where does my  story end?


--- PAGE 57 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
50 
 • What is the outcome or resolution? And why?  
• Do you answer any and all questio ns presented?  
• Did you fulfill the premise of the st ory?  
 
6) Are  there rising tensions ?  
• Are there surprises?  
• How does the conflict escalate?  
• Is there a climax?  
 7) Who are my characters?  
• Are they likable?  
• Interestin g? Unique or different?  
• Bigger than life?  
• Will an audience care about them?  
 8) Wha t or who is my protagonist like?  
• Can audiences empathize with them?  
• What do they want?  
• What are their goals in life? Needs?  
• What's at stake for them?  
• Are they tied to  the problem they face?  
• Are they in a positio n of n o turning back?  
 9) What are my c haracters motivation?  
• Are these motivations shown?  
• Justified  or unjustified ?  
• Built into the story?  
 10) Who or what   is the antagonist  my story?  
• Why are they trying to stop your protagonist?  
• Is the antagonist a worthy foe?  
• What drives them?  
• What do  they want or need?  
  

--- PAGE 58 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
51 11) Do I over explain my story?
• Is everything spelled out too clearly?
• Is the set up "messy" and too busy?
• Do events get explained or  unfold dra matically?
• Do too many key events  take place off screen?
12)If my S to
ry and Characters  are fictitious, can  I
now believe that they are real ?
THE
 CITY PLANNING COMMISION 
Like earlier mentioned, act  as if you were the head of the 
city’s planning commissi on, plot out your world and your 
citizens and start creating your world. If using a chart  or 
index cards help… Do it! Nowadays , we have so many 
free resources at our fingertips, you should use them.  
Th
ere are tons of chart templates available for free on 
the web, clip ar t and a good old fashion pencil and 
paper  work, just as well.  MY NEW  
WORLD  
THE SCRIPT  
 
CHARACTER  
TWO 
THE FRIEND  CHARACTER  
ONE  
THE HERO  CHARACTER  
THREE  
THE ENEMY  

--- PAGE 59 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
52 
5. CREATING CHARACTER
CHARA
CTER  DEVELOPMENT PART 1  
PREPARING  TO GIVE BIRTH  
As you plan the creation of your characters, remember that 
each character you create requires a detailed analysis  of its 
relations with all of the other c haracters in the story.  
The 
individual status of each character is defined through 
your story's network of oppositions that it forms with the other characters. The relation between characters and the action of the  story shifts, often miming shifts in the  society 
that you have created; such as human individuality, self -
determination, and the social order.  
CHARACTERS THOUGHTS  
Always take on your characters persona, try and walk in their shoes. Think, wha t do I do? T hen, if you've seen someone 
do the same t hing in a movie, question yourself about what 
your character would do. For example, I wrote a comedy 

--- PAGE 60 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
53 
 script about General Laborers being exploited by some bad 
guys. I ha d to do some research, so I pretended that I w as 
from another country with no ID, and I  got hired for (three 
bucks an hour, after all the fees) because they were taking the risk hiring me. I ended up with a job, working for a bunch of really bad people usi ng a bunch of helpless immigrants for 
assembly  work. Talk about building the back -story  for a 
character. In three weeks, I had a lifetime of material. These guys were crazy, and I don't except anyone to go to those extremes to write a comedy. But, I came away with a  
comedy and an action dr ama. Also, I f you are going to write 
about someone’s cu lture you better know what you are 
talking about. If you are inaccurate in your story telling you 
will come off like an unprofessional hack. Remember: Research, Research and then more research...  
 That being said…  Rich and I love to deepen a character 
above and beyond normal reason. But then again, who said 
that writers and screenwriters are normal?  
Other writers, that’s who…  
 We like to create a dossier on each of our characters . When 
the di rector asked our writing partner Frank Roche for a li ttle 
background on each character in our script The Italy Boy’s, we were able to do so  quickly. He 
was impressed at the depth and detail of each of 
the characters. He even made a comment , on 
how the actor s 
will love this  for 
adding depth to their roles.  
  


--- PAGE 61 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
54 CONDUCT AN INTERVIEW WITH YOUR CHARACTER  
Grab a couple  of drinks, maybe make dinner and get ready 
to interview, the character you are about to create for your 
screenplay. Listed here are some questions for your 
characters, to help you get to know them on a one- to-one 
basis, even if the exact information nev er shows up in your 
script. As the God of your world that you created in your script, these questions will help you build a foundation and 
develop the characters you've created as well.  
Put the questions and answers on index cards or divide each character separately. This will help create a back 
story for each character later so as to deepen your characters. What year were they born in and where?  
1.Wha
t is their favorite color?
2.What type of birth did they have?
3.What makes them laugh?
4.What makes them sad?
5.What makes them Angry?
6.What makes them cry?
7.How do they make a living?
8.How do they feel about their mother?
9.How do they  feel about their father?
10. What sport(s) do they love to play?
11. What sport(s) d o they love to watch?
12. What is their favorite movie?
13. What is their favorite Music?
14. What is their favorite TV show?
15. What is their favorite beverage?
16. What is their favorite food?
17. What is their political affiliation?
18. Do they gamble?
19. Do they have kids?
20. Do they like  kids?
21. Are they married?

--- PAGE 62 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
55 
 22. Have they ever  been married?  
23. Do they believe in marriage?  
24. What religion are they?  
25.  The most exciting thing that happened to them?  
26. The most traumatic thing that happened to them?  
27. What type of house or apartment do they live i n?  
28. How is their house or apartment furni shed?   
29. Do they have any physical diseases?  
30. Do they have any physical Disabilities?  
31. Have they ever been in love? With whom and when?  
32. Where and when was their first sexual encounter?  
33. What  one thing about the world would you change?  
34. What was their most recent dream?  
35. Do they smoke or drink alcohol?  
36. Do they use drugs?  
37. What are three character flaws?  
38. What is their goal in lif e?  
39. What is their strongest physical attribute?  
40. What do they like most about their body?  
41. What do they like Least abo ut themselves?  
42. Who in the world would they change places with? 
43. Who do they idolize?  
44. Who do they Worship?  
45. Are they aggressive?  
46. Are they P assive?  
47. Do they read the newspaper?  
48. Do they read Books?  
49. Do they read Magazi nes?  
50. Who is  their favorite actor and o r actress?  
51. What animal would they choose to be?  
52. How do they dress?  
53. How do they show or protect their feelings?  
54. How do they feel about death?  
55. How do they get along with other people?  
56. How did their father influence them?  
57. Their mother?  
58. Their siblings ?  
59. Do they have a brother and or sister?  

--- PAGE 63 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
56 
60. Was their childhood strict? Lenient?
61. Were they overprotected? Rejected? Loved?
62. What was their family’s economic status?
63. Are they smart? Intelligent? Savvy? Slow witted?
64. Did they go to H igh school? College?
65. Did they like s chool? Their teachers , classmates?
66. Do they travel? Where? Why?
67. Do they have friends? Who? Why? How’d they meet ?
68. What are their  hobbies? Interests?
69. Do they daydream? Worry? Stress?
70. What is their outlook on life?  Positive? Negative?
71. How do they deal with hostility? Negativity? Ridicule?
72. What is their health like?
73. What is their self -image ?
74. How do they feel about their size? Lo oks? Weight?
75. What's their voice like? Shrill? High? Low?
76. How do they act? Impulsive  or Self-controlled ?
77. Are they energetic? Sluggish?
78. Do they work out?
79. How do they feel about the opposite sex?
80. How do they feel about the same sex?
We’ve u
sed these questions and others for years , but feel 
free to create new ones. Wat ch or re ad news interviews and 
glean some of the ir questions. Learn form the best  and you’ll 
be the best . 

--- PAGE 64 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
57 
CHARACTER NAMES  
When you give a character a name, just like G od you gi ve 
him or her life. I love to get really creative when I give 
characters their names. To me , their names contribute to 
their individual personalities. They need to be realistic names, associated to their culture, beliefs, or way of life. Even nicknames  are great, the character may have taken on 
the nickname to hide an embarrassing real name.  Perhaps, his nickname is there to project a false bravado and to hide a 
short coming.  
 MR. PAISLEY is a kindly shoemaker 
who the kids make jokes about. 
JOEY is a  regular kind of guy. NICKY 
is a hard working guy. ROCKO has a real or perceived to ugh guy image.   
A woman bounty hunter named DOMINO is kind of sexy 
in a dangerous kind of way.    
In one of our scripts we have a character that is a huge behemoth of a man,  hairy, huge and not very good looking. 
However, he’s a great guy, everyone loves him. Though i t is 
never shown, It turns out that this massive character has an 
extremely large member. This fact accounts for him being 
married to the hottest girl in town; I t’s a sort of beauty and 
the friendly beast part of the story.  He was also Italian, so 
we just  knew we had to give him a tough, but also a kind of 
lovable name.    
So Mike  and I set the character aside for the time being and 
continued on with the story. T he la st thing I remember I fell 
asleep at my desk; I wake up five hours latter from  a dream 
of when I was a kid.  My uncle was yelling at my fat friend 
Carlo, telling him what a stupid Magoo he was. That was it; 

--- PAGE 65 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
58 
we named the character CARLO MAGOOSSI, affec tionately 
referred to by his friends as MAGOO.  A character was born!  
I like to g ive all our characters good names. 
After all, Rich has three kids, and I have four 
kids with one on the way.  Between the two of us, we’re always naming somebody, something.   Together, my friend Johnny and I 
owned a club for a few years; hundreds of people would come through the doors every 
week.  It was near impossible to memorize 
everyone’s name.  So, we would say, “Hey! how ya’ doing tough guy? Hey you!  We would sometimes  mumble a name. 
After a while we would make up names that fit their character.  There was a guy  who used to ask for quarters all 
the time so, we called him QUARTERS  and so on…  
Sometimes with secondary characters, 
whose characteristics help propel the stor y 
rather than their character themselves; I 
would give them colorful nicknames 
some thing descri ptive like: POCKETS, (a 
shoplifter) CHOPSTICKS, (a Chinese Cook) QUARTERS, (a guy that plays arcade games all day) SNEAKS, (a very un-truthful guy).   
In this wa y, the reader knows who this character is and won't 
have to struggle keep track of them later. On the other hand, never name characters KILLER #1, KILLER#2. If you must, call the character ONE EYED KILLER and FAT KILLER. This will help the reader visualize  your character. If you want 
to have some fun with the reader,  have the character  
become SY TH E ONE EYED KILLER.  Give it a few lines 
until the reader knows he's SY. Don’t use names that are hard to pronounce, it’s distracting. Don’t give female characters male names, it confuses the reader.  


--- PAGE 66 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
59 
 
REMEMBER: If it doesn’t propel your 
story, don’t waste your time  with it. 
Don’t give a reader an excuse for tossing it in the trash before he finishes reading it.  
 
Aristotle the first screenwriter.  
 
ARISTOTLE’S SIX  COMPONENTS OF DRAMA  
1) Plot - The arrangement of  events or  incidents . 
2) Characters - Provide motivation, plot and conflict.  
3) Language - D ialogue is in 2 part s, Dramatic  & Narrative . 
4) Themes  - Thought & ideas and behind a story . 
5) Rhythm  - Dramas were performed in song.  Music / mood . 
6) Spectacle – The set, costume s and special  effects . 
 It was the Greeks  that first 
stated that a show or scene 
must have a beginning, 
middle and end. In t he 
beginning the protagonist 
lives a good life but has a 
great character flaw. At the 
end of the beginning, there is 
a reversal of fortune.  This fall is brought on by the 
chara cter’s flaw.  
In the middle the protagonist fights against his change but by 
the end of the middle recognizes his error.  He changes from 
ignorance to knowledge, but alas it is too late.  
In the end there is a catastrophe that brings on great 
suffering, w hich results in a soul cleansing, if not for the 
protagonist, then for the audience.  The world, which has 
been thrown to chaos, is restored to order.  
 


--- PAGE 67 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
60 Aristotle’s Elements of a Scene.  
Plot-What are the events of the scene? What is the conflict? What 
stands before the protagonist and their goals? What are the 
obstacles and hurdles? There must be one in any play.  
Char
acter - 
•Who are the characters?
•What function does each character serve?
•What do they stand for?
•If they  don’t propel the story, why  are they there?
Genr
e- How would you classify the your  script ?  
Form -
 The scene condensed to its mos t basic  form.  
Sty
le- This might be predetermined based on the genre that you  
chose. Examples of this are:  
NATURALISM  
REALISM  
SELECTIVE REALISM  
Th
eme-  It’s the u niversal statement about the human condition 
that goes beyond plot. Your prescr iption for how life should be 
lived, what is wrong  with the world etc. This is not imposed on a 
scene, but evolves out of it.  Not a message. Write your first draft, 
examine it and decide what you are really saying beneath the 
surface, and you can develop it further.  
 Always ask yourself when you jump to a different location or time -
is this n ecessary? 
Theophr
astus- 370-287BC . 
Theo was the most important disciple and friend of Aristotle. His 
work on personality, THE CHARACTERS, was satirical. Look what he discovered about people and types through his work. I have helped out a little by adding characters you will know.  

--- PAGE 68 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
61 
 CHARACTER TYPES:  
THE IRONICAL (SARCASTIC) 
THE FLATTERER 
THE CHATTERER 
THE BOOR  
ANXIOUS TO PLEASE 
OUTCAST  
SHAMELESS  
STINGY  PERSON  
DETESTABLE PERSON 
UNTIME LY PERSON  
OVERDOING IT  
HOSTILE PERSON  
THE BOASTER  
ARROGANCE PERSON 
COWARDLY  PERSON  
THE LATE LEARNER 
GREEDY PERSON 
AUTHORITARIAN  
Think of F ilms and TV  shows you l ove and identify these types  
characters in each. You’ll be surprised how is they are to identif y. 

--- PAGE 69 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
62 
 1. Character Development Part 2  
    b. Character Arcs  
A character Arc is the status of the character as it unfolds 
throughout the story, the storyline or ser ies of episodes. 
Since the definition of character arc centers on the 
character, it  is generally equated as the emotional change of 
the character within the narrative. Characters begin the story 
with a certain viewpoint and, through events in the story, that  
viewpoint changes. Often this change is for the better, but it 
can also be for the worse or simply different. Character arc 
are most evident in character drama or in subplots. Some 
examples include:  
• In Tootsie , Dustin Hoffman’s character begins as a 
misogyn istic chauvinist but when he is forced to play the 
part of a woman, he also experiences a change in how he 
views women and becomes a different character by the 
end.  
• In Empire of the Sun , Jim begins as a carefree young 
boy. After the Japanese take over  Shanghai and he is 
separated from his family, he is forced to suffer trauma 
becaus e of the war .  
• In The Godfather , Michael Corleone at first does not want 
to have anything to do with his father’s crime business. 
When his father is attacked and barely surv ives, Michael 
realizes his love for his father and begins a war of 
retribution on t hose respons ible.  
Unlike a story arc, the character arc is not confined within 
the limit s of one story. The character arc may extend over to 
the next story, a sequel, or an other episode. In episodic TV 
series, the character arc has become the hook with which 
the writ ers use to ensure viewers continue watching.  

--- PAGE 70 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
63 
•Over the course of the Star Wars  prequel trilogy, Anakin
Skywalker goes from a protector of the Old Republic to
becomi ng corrupted by Palpatine and, in the end, he
becomes the villainous Darth Vader.
•Smallville focuses on character arcs
for each of its main characters as they
progress into their Superman comic
book identities. Clark Kent's arc
revolved around the gradual
acceptance of his destiny and
becoming a hero. The series also
tracks Lex Luthor's progression into
darkness and Lois Lane's emulation of
her cousin Chloe as she becomes a
hardened journalist. Other characters have their eventual
character arc alluded to but never explicitly defined or
realized onscreen, such as Perry White's rise to editor of
the Daily Planet and Pete Ross's ascension to President of
the United States. As well as individual characters, there
are arcs involving many characters which int ertwine to tell
the formation of the Justice League.
•In Gargoyles , the coming of age of Brookl yn is subtly
portrayed as his difficulties in his personal life and his
event ual promotion and adjustment to the clan's second in
command position develop until they simultaneously come
to a head when Goliath, Elisa and Bronx disappear on their
world tour.  ***
WRITING CHARACTERS OF THE OPPOSITE SEX  
Perhaps the most fundamental error made by authors, 
whether novice or experienced, is that all their characters, male  and female, tend to reflect the gender of the author. 
This is hardly surprising, since recent research finally proves that men and women use their brains in different ways . So 
how can an author overcome this gap to write character of the opposite sex that  are both accurate and believable to 
their own gender?  

--- PAGE 71 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
64 At first, it might seem tha t being male or female is an easily 
definable thing, and therefore easy to convey in one’ s 
writing. But as we all know, the differences between the 
sexes have historically b een a mysterious quality, easily felt, 
but in fact quite hard to define. This is because what m akes 
a mind male or female is not just one thing, but several.  
First, let’s consider that gender 
has four principal components:  
Anatomical Sex  
Sexual Preferenc e 
Gender Identity  
Mental Sex  
Anatomical sex describes the physicality of a character – 
male or female. Now, we all know that people actually fall in a range – more or less hairy, wider or narrower hips, deeper 
or higher voice, and so on. So although there is  a fairly clear 
dividing line between male and female anatomically, secondary sexual characteristics actually create a range of physicality between the two. Intentionally  choosing these 
attributes for your characters can make them far less stereotypical as  men and women.  
Sexual Preferences may be for the same sex, the opposite sex, bo th, or neither (or self). Although people usually define 
themselves as being straight, gay, bi, or celibate, this is also not a fixed quality. Statistics show, for example, th at 1/3 of 
all men has a homosexual encounter at least once in their lives. Althou gh it often stirs up controversy to say so, in truth 
most people have passing attractions  to the same sex, be it 
a very pretty boy or a “butch” woman. Consider the sexual prefer ence of your characters not as a fixed choice of one 

--- PAGE 72 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
65 thing or another, but as a  fluid quali ty that may shift over 
time or in a particular exceptional context.  
Gender Identity describes where one falls on the scale 
between masculine and feminine. This,  of course, is also 
context dependent. For example, when one is in the woods, at home with one’s family or being chewed out by the boss. Gender Identity is not just how one feels or things of oneself, 
but also how one acts, how one uses one’s voice, and how one wishes to be treated. Often, a male character may have gentle feelings but cover them up by overly masculine mannerisms. Or, a female character may be “all -business” in 
the workplace out of necessity, but wish someone would treat her with softness and kindness. Actually, Gender 
Identity is made up of how one acts or wishes to act, and how one is treated or wishes to be treated. How many times have we seen a character who is forced by others to play a role that is in conflict with his or her internal gende r self -
image? Gender Identity is where one can explore the greatest nuance in c reating non- stereotypical characters.  
Finally, Mental Sex describes where one falls on t he scale 
from practical, binary, linear, logistic, goal -oriented thinking 
to passion ate, flexible, emotional, process -oriented thinking. 
In fact, every human being engages in ALL of these approaches to life, just at different times and in different ways.  
Now, in creating characters, consider that each of the four categories we just explored  is not a simple choice between 
one thing or another, but a sliding scale (like Anatomical Sex) or a conglomerate 
of individual traits (like Gender Identity). 
Then, visualize that wherever a character falls in any one of those four categories places abso lutely no limits on where 
he or she may fall in the other categories.  


--- PAGE 73 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
66 For example, you might  have a character extremely toward 
male anatomical sex, bi -sexual (but leaning toward a straight 
relationship at the moment), whose gender identity is rough 
and tumble ( but yearns to be accepted for his secret 
sensitivity toward impressionisti c paintings)  who is practical 
all the time (except when it comes to sports cars).  
ANY CO MBINATION GOES.  
But when it comes to Mental Sex itself, there are four sub-
categories  within that area alone which tend to define the 
different personality types we encounter:  
Subconscious  
Memory  
Conscious  
Preconscious  
In brief, each of these “levels” or  “attributes” of the mind can 
lean toward seeing the world in definable or experient ial 
terms. Pre -conscious is a tendency to perceive the world in 
components or as pr ocesses that  is determined before birth. 
It is the foundation of leaning toward the tradition “male” or “female” personality traits. Subconscious determines the tendencies w e have to be attracted or repelled from 
component or process rewards. Memory relies  on our 
training to organize our considerations in a given  situation 
toward components or  processes. An d every character 
always has a conscious choice to focus on the componen ts 
or processes at any given moment. In other words, in a given situation, at each level of M ental Sex does a character 
center on the way things are or the way things are going? At 
each level is the character more interested in getting his or her ducks i n a row or in a pond?  

--- PAGE 74 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
67 
 Finally, beyond all of these considerations is the cultural 
indoctrinati on we all receive that leads us to respond within 
social expectations appropriately to the role associated with our anatomical sex. These roles are fairly rigid an d include 
what is proper to wear, who speaks first, who opens the door or order the wine, who  has to pretend to be inept where and 
skilled where else (regardless of real ability or lack thereof  in 
that area), the form of grammar one uses in constructing  
sentences, the words one is expected to use (“I’ll take a hamburger,” vs. “I’d like a salad”),  and the demeanor 
allowable in social interaction with the same and the opposi te sex, among many other qualities.  
In the end, writing characters of the opposite  sex requires a 
commitment to understand the difference between those qualities which are inherent and those which are learned, and to accept that we are all made of the sam e clay, but just 
sculpt it in different ways. ****
Excerpts from Melanie Anne Philli ps  
 “Writing Characters of the Opposite Sex ” 
 
 
HEROES & VILLAINS  
If you are writing with only Heroes and Villains, you are limiting yourself. A Hero is a Main Character who is also a 
Protagonist. A Villain is an Obstacle Character who is also an Antagonis t.  
What’s the difference between a Main Character and a Protagonist? The Main Character repres ents the audience 
position in the story. It is the character the audience most  
cares about, most empathizes with. The Protagonist is the character who drives the p lot forward.  
These two functions don’t have to be placed in the same character as they are i n a Hero. In real life, we are not 
always running the show. Similarly in stories, the Main Character doesn’t have to always be the guy leading the charge. Separati ng the two functions opens up a wide 

--- PAGE 75 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
68 
 variety of new audience experiences and creates characte rs 
that are less archetypal and formulaic.  
Similarly, when we split a Villain  into an Obstacle Character 
and an Antagonist, we open up opportunities, some of whic h 
bear directly on the nature and function of a Love Interest 
and the structure of a "Buddy P icture."  
First, what is the difference between the Obstacle Character and the  Antagonist? The Obstacle Character represents a 
point of view opposite that of the M ain Character. Every 
Main Character will be driven by some central belief system around which  the story’s philosophic argument revolves. 
This belief system might be an attitude, a way of doing things, or something as extensive as a specific “world view.”  
The Obstacle Character represents the view that is 
diametrically opposed.  
Over th e course of the story, the Obstacle Character’s 
impact will bring the Main Character to a point of decision at which he or she must choose to stick with the old “tried and true” philosophy/approach or to adopt the alternative put 
forth by the Obstacle Char acter. In ma ny stories, this 
moment results in a “Leap of Faith” in which the Main Charact er is forced to make a conscious decision to go with 
one view or the other at the c ritical moment. In other stories, 
the Main Character may gradually warm to the Obst acle 
Charact er’s view, but the audience is not sure if that warmth 
will hold when the chip s are down. Only at the critical 
moment will the story demonstrate on which side of  the 
fence the Main Character drops, not by conscious choice but by responding from  the heart.  
When a Hero battles a Villain, both the functional relationship of the Protagonist/Antagonist battle for supremacy in the plot and the personal relationship of th e 
Main Character/Obstacle Character occur between the same 