

--- PAGE 26 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
19 
•SOME OTHER FORMAT WARNINGS
•Never end a page wi th a Scene H eading. The
only time this is okay is if  another scene heading
or shot follows.
•Never start a page with a Transition.
•Automatically place Continued: notations when it
breaks an Action paragraph or a Dialogue.
•Never end a page with a Character  Name line.
•Never end a page at a Parenthetical.
•If you have Dialogue, a Parenthetical and then
Dialogue again, break the page BEFORE theParenthetical.

--- PAGE 27 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
20 
SCREENWRITING SOFTWARE  
You can avoid much of this minutia by simply obtaining a 
SCREENW RITING PROGR AM that handles the formatting 
issues so  you can concentrate on creativity.  
  
You can purchase Movie Magic  
at :   www.screenpla y.com  
                                                    FINAL DRAFT can be 
purchased at: www.finaldraft.com  
 
 
 
    
FADE IN is a downloadable Script Writing App for smart devices.  
www.fadeinpro.com  
With Celtx online workspace, you and your partners can sync and share 
scripts and production files,  
and di scuss your work  
as it is being created.   
www.celtx.com  
 
ALL ABOVE HAVE A FREE 
TRIAL VERSION FOE 
DOWNLOAD  
 


--- PAGE 28 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
21 FORMAT Cover Page TRADITIONAL 
This traditional cover style has been around for decades, it’s 
always a saf e bet to go with what always works.  

--- PAGE 29 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
22 FORMAT Cover Page NEW STYLE  
 
This cover style was just on several studio scripts I received 
and seem s to be establishing itself as the latest and 
greatest.  However, unless your agent or manager asks you 
to use it, stick with the traditional format.  

--- PAGE 30 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
23 FORMAT Page 1 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 31 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
24 FORMAT PAGE 2  


--- PAGE 32 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
25 FORMAT - CAPITALIZATION AND SPACING  
 
Page Margins – If you want to set up your own tabs and 
margins, use the following guides:  
 Left margin -  1.5 inches  
Right margin -  1 inch (or 8”  from the left edge)  
Top margin -  1 inch  
Bottom margin -  1inch  
 Margins of Screenplay Elements  
Scene Hea ding -  1.5” from the left edge of the page 
Action Lines -  1.5”  from the left edge of the page  
Character -   3.7”  from the left edge of the page  
Dialogue -   2.5”  from the left edge of the page  
Parentheticals -  3.1”  from the left edge of the page  
 Spacing  
Dialogue should be no wider than 3.5 inches.  
Set your right margin of all dialogue at 6 inches from the left edge of the page.  
Parentheticals should be no wider than 2.5 inches.  
Set y our right margin of all parentheticals at 5.6” from 
the left edge of the page.  
 Page Numbers  
Page numbers should appear in the upper right corner. Your first page should not carry a page number.  
 Scene Nu mbers  
The primary difference between a spec script – w hat you 
are writing – and a shooting script is the addition of 
scene numbers. Spec scripts do not have scene numbers. Shooting scripts add scene numbers for use in 
production.  
 
DON’T  add scene numbers  
to your spec script . 
 


--- PAGE 33 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
26 FORMAT - THE SCENE  
The buildin g blocks of your screenplay are scenes.  
There is a beginning, middle, and an end.  
And, in almost all cases, your scene should move the 
story forward.  
 An average- length movie has around 40 to 60 scen es.  
Most scenes are 2- 3 pages or 2- 3minutes.  
 Watc h a movie with a stopwatch and time it yourself. 
Certainly these numbers  
are just an approximation but it’s helpful to keep that number in mind.  
 Outlining, or structuring, your screenplay before you begi n 
writing is  a great way to get started.  
 Many writ ers start by jotting down scene ideas on paper or in 
a software program  such as with Movie Magic Screenwriter 
before they start writing their screenplay.  
 For example, let’s imagine our job is to write the next James  
Bond movie. This is not  that difficult because James Bond 
movies often follow the same structure.  
What type of  scenes do we find in a James Bond movie?  
 
1. An opening thrilling action sequence.  
2. Bond gets a mission from headquarters.  
3. Bon d meets a beautiful woman (or two).  
4. Bond finds out she is really a spy or an agent.  
5. Bond still sleeps with her, convinces her to join forces . 
6. Bond goes to a casino or event to spy on his enemy.  
7. The enemy captures Bond tries to kill him, fails. 
8. Bond goes  to HQ to see  the latest cool gadgets . 
 
Except for  SKYFALL , Bond films are so predictable that  
even the entire Austin Powers films were written with the 
same structure. Satirically, t hat’s why they were so 
successful. They parodied all these scenes that we’ve come 

--- PAGE 34 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
27 to expect in Bond films.  In fac t, you can think of most genres 
of having similar structures.  
 
A horror film often follows a particular scene structure.  
 Romantic comedies, action films, love stories, and detective thrillers also follow similar s tructures. That isn’t bad 
necessarily. W hile your screenplay should be wholly original, 
you also want there to be a level of familiarity to the audience.  
 It’s not that hard to think of 40 to 60 scenes. You can write an average of 2- 3 pages in just an hour  or so. That means 
you could write a scr eenplay in just 2 months on your lunch 
break.  Now it shouldn’t seem so overwhelming.  
 SCENE ELEMENTS  
Now let’s break down this scene into the 5 major elements of a screenplay.  
 
1. Scene Heading  
2. Action  Line 
3. Character  
4. Dialogue  
5. Parenthetical  
 SCENE  HEADING  – Also called the Slugline, the Scene 
Heading breaks down into 3 parts.  As we said earlier…  
 The Scene Heading is always written in ALL CAPS . 
 
INT. CHURCH HALL - WEDDING RECEPTION – DAY 
 
1. INT . or EXT.  (Interior or Exterior)  
2. LOCATION  – Wher e is the scene taking place?  
3. TIME OF DAY  – When is the scene taking place?  
   

--- PAGE 35 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
28 ACTION LINE 
The Action Line tells us what is happening in the scene. It is always written in the present tense. When you first intro duce 
a character, you can introduce him or her in ALL CAPS. The 
rest of the Action Line is not written in all caps.  
A s
ign over the counter reads: GYROS & SPYROS - 
ATTORNEYS AT LAW. A client named JOYCE who is looking for the two attorneys, wa nders into t he church and 
reception.  She has a look  of confusion on her face. when 
she sees  Attorney Gyros  dressed as the Priest at the 
reception and the sees a ranting Attorney Spyros dressed as 
a chef cooking for the wedding reception. Joyce passes out.  
ATTORNEY GYROS 
Stand back, I'm also a doctor! 
Some w
riters write action lines sparely. Others are more 
detailed in their descriptions. Write using a style that is personal and comfortable to you. But, remember, that your action lines will not be read by the audience, only the 
director and actors.  
We touched
 on some of these details earlier.  
CHARACTE
R – The Character Line is obviously the name 
of the Character speaking. It is written in ALL CAPS. You do not have to name every speaking part in your s creenplay. 
For minor characters that speak just once o r twice, you can 
certainly name them MAN #1, WOMAN #2, BOY #1, etc.  
DIAL
OGUE  – Another fairly obvious one. Dialogue is what 
your character is speaking. Movie dialogue is different than normal, everyday  conversatio n. In most cases, you want to 
keep your di alogue brief and to the point. Keep the story 
moving forward.  
PARE
NTHETICAL  – The parenthetical describes a 
character’s action or dialogue. For example, you could use a 

--- PAGE 36 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
29 parenthetical to make sure a character whisp ers or screams. 
You could use it to add a pause or “beat” to a character’s 
dialogue. As I said earlier, use parentheticals sparingly. 
Many writers mistakenly use parentheticals too often. Let the actors and director do their jobs. Only use a parenthetical if 
your dialogue requires it.   PRINTING  YOUR SCREENPLAY  
 
• You should print your screenplay on 8 ½” x 11”  
• 3-hole punched  
• 20# white paper.   
• A script is always written in Courier 12- point font.  
• You should bind  your 88 to 120 page script with 
industry -stand ard  No. 5 brass bra ds in the top and 
bottom holes of the paper. Do not put a brad in the 
middle hole… NO!  I don’t know why…  
   
 
 

--- PAGE 37 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
30 
You Can also visit  The Writers 
Guild East at:  
www.wgaeast.org  
Script Registration is one of the most popular services 
offered by the Writers Guild East. We register the creative 
material of thousands of writers each year. Before you start 
sending your work to agents, producers and actors, make 
sure you protect your material with the Writers Guild Online 
Script Registration service. 
Script Registration fees are: 
$10 for WGAE members 
$17 for students with ID 
$25 for non-members 
We always first register at the US Copyright Office on line. 
(See the section called: Street  Legal)

--- PAGE 38 ---

31 
 
 
 
2 WHAT’S YOUR STORY  
 
WHAT MAKES FOR A GOOD S TORY?  
Think of the movies that you loved the most , the characters 
that remain imbedded deep into your mind. Think of the film 
that has nothing to do with your way of life , but drew you in 
and made you fe el personally  part of the story . Desire, 
hunger, lust, envy or just plain passion for the pers on or the 
life they are portraying.  Whatever kind of film  you write, 
whether it  is a horror, comedy, drama or action flick. It has to  
grab the attention of the au dience. They have to fall in love 
with th e hero or villain that you created. Maybe they fall i n 
love with their combined journey or the story itself. You need to make the world that you created on paper, translate 
through the director directly to the screen. The only way to tell if you were succe ssful is thr ough the audiences 
response. Today’s view ing audiences want   to watch movie s 
that they can get interested in, make a connection with the 
people they see on the screen or just plain escape from 
reality fo r 88 minutes.  You want them to talk passi onately  

--- PAGE 39 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
32 
about the  film, whether the characters are r eal or not. Great 
heroes and even anti -hero’ s can sometime inspire or enrage 
a movie viewer.  You want the movie viewer to  jump into a 
conversation bragging, cond emning, quoting  or even 
complaining about  the conduct  of your characters in your 
story. The ma in thing is that they talk about the movie you 
wrote, speak about your story with great conviction. It was 
funny, horrific, tragic or sweet… If they ain’t talking , it ain’t 
good. Silence is not golden.  
In a 
good movie , there is always s omething  someone want s, 
no matter what the risk. Just like in  Indiana Jones and the 
Raiders of the Lost Ark, Hitler and his Nazis wanted the Ark of the covenant to give them power over their enemies. Indiana Jones and his colleague Marcus wanted to study it and the US Governme nt wanted to bury it in a warehouse 
and keep it hidden for a rainy day. Or something highly desired by as  many main characters as possible, like the 
package of diamonds in the movie Setup. Bruce Willis  will kill 
anyone to get back his shipment of diamonds; so will all the 
other characters. Sometimes it can be an intangible thing, like Joe Pesci  in Goodfellas, wanting to get made. All these 
things drive the charac ter's journey . It can  be something 
person al  like rom ance or for the good of all, saving the 
world from a contagious disease. But it must be powerful 
and grow  more desperate as the story unfolds.   
Ther
e are always obstacles, which 
provide that catchword that actors love so  much “CONFLICT. ”  This is 
the he art and soul of drama. 
Conflict intensifies  and deepens a 
story. When you add conflict you explore the Who, What, Where and 
Why the conflict is taking place and can take the story as deep as your page co unt will allow. Someone wants to reach 
their goal, b ut something or someone  keeps getting in t he 
way of them achieving the goal. At times,  the obstacles can 

--- PAGE 40 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
33 be common to both the heroes  and villain s, and the ultimate 
goal a worthy one for both parties, as in Jingle All The Way. 
In that film, Arn old Schwarze negger and Sinbad battle to 
achieve the sa me goal--the acquisition of  the last popular 
action figure for sale that Christmas season. Both of them 
have promised their son, and they must not fail. Conflict and 
obstacles can be physical  or emotion al. But they  have to be 
in your story or you don't really have a story. In  most good 
stories, the protagonist will also have an inner obstacle, some mental  or even spiritual issue that will be r esolved by 
the time th ey reach  the physical goal of the story.  Some  
people call this an inner demon.  
YO
U NEED A HOO K 
That's a songwriting term that describes that thing that catches the public's  attention. A popular Hollywood term is a 
"high concept."  According to Steve Kaire, who in my 
opinion is one of the best pitch  guys in  the 
business ( He wrote a how to on pitchi ng 
called:: “HIGH CONCEPT” ); He says, a 
better idea might be a simple "What if?" 
In F
erris Bueller’s Day Off , for example, the concept is: 
"What if Ferris can skip school, just one more day before graduation, with out getting caught ? " THE GOOD GUY WAS 
RIGHT , BUT WE HATED HIM...  In the story , principle 
Edward Rooney spent the whole movie trying to prove that Ferris was a liar , who was  faking that he was sick so he 
could skip school. If Rooney  proves Ferris is a fake  he can 
flunk him and make him repeat his se nior year. Though 
Rooney was right and Ferris was wrong for skipping school, lying to his parents and du ping a community to support him. 
We rooted for Ferris  as the good guy when in fact he was 
criminal in all his actions and Rooney who we hated was just  
doing his job... Great, conflict, comedy, depth of characters 
and great story telling altogether. Even in the end credits when Rooney rode the bus home with a new generation of students, the graffiti clearly stat ed,  Rooney  SUCKS ! 


--- PAGE 41 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
34 
 HOLLYWOOD BUYS IDEAS AND THEY CONCENTRATE 
ON GENRES . Agents,  managers, and producers are drawn 
to and specialize in specific genres so approaching them 
with something they can recognize is a good idea.  
 
Rich and I had a chance at new representation out in LA, so he set up  the me eting and flew out there. The meeting was 
at their Beverly Hills  offices and to  be frank with you, the 
meeting could not have gone any  better. As a matter of fact,  
they had read our latest script and thought it was  the 
funniest thing that they had ever read.  They began 
suggesting who should be  attached, who should direct, 
produce and so on. We were pumped up to the max; we 
were ready to start spending the check that  was going to be 
in the  mail… We waited  and waited and waited… Finally, we 
get a call from the agency, though they love the sc ript and 
see a lot of potential… H owever, the new  head of the 
agency has decided to clear its shelves of ALL Comedy Projects and c oncentrate on horror.  What are you gonna do? 
Write a horror for them since you did not bring on e with you. 
The only problem with that is, by the time you do they’ll be on the new flavor of the week. Best to move on to the next opportunity, instead of fishi ng in the same pond.  
 Successful screenplays  have a fresh face but are 
identifiable. You’ll kno w what makes  your idea unique, and 
you’ll be able to describe it quickly to others.  Is it a fast-
paced thriller, romantic comedy, action adventure? Or 
maybe it’s  an epic crime saga taking place in the 1960’s and 
is fit for episodic cable television… Oo ps! Sorry, forgot and 
thought I was pitching! But, I think you get the picture.  
Find your own quick  line that will hook someone into wanting 
to read your screenplay . It is basically the same thing as a  
logline, w hich is a one line summary of a screenplay.   They 
can run two or three lines, but no more than that.  Your hook, 
takes your stories plotlines and high- concept ideas and 

--- PAGE 42 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
35 
 breaks it down into a simple sentence that can be quickly 
and easily told to a wide range of people.  
Parts of the Hook  
• Characters   
o Who are the main character s?  
o What do the  main characters want?  
o What are their  main goal s? 
• Conflict   
o What is the main obstacle to the character s 
obtaining their goal?  
• Setting   
o Time period  
o Genre  
o Style  
• Action  
o Your hook needs to have action and 
excitement . 
o NEVER BE BORING ! 
Examples:  
• An archeologist is hired by the U.S. government to 
find the Ark of the Covenant before the Nazis.  
(Raiders of the Lost Ark ) 
• A Roman general  is betrayed and his family killed by 
an insane newly crowned emperor. Now a gladiator, 
the general comes to Rome to seek revenge. 
(Gladiator ) 
For your own hook line, you need to decide which elements best convey what your story is about. It is interesting to see 
how adding different element s affects a hook line.  
BOTTOM LINE … WHAT IS A GREAT HO OK?   
Ah, that's what writers get paid hundreds of thousands of 
dollars to know. But remember, what we said ask yourself one question… How is my script  different? What did I put in 

--- PAGE 43 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
36 
 my movie that has nev er been seen  before? A character, a 
situation, a n event that’s never been seen before? The other 
question you must ask yourself is,  
 "Is my story a movie or a book ?"  
 “ Can I see my movie appearing on the big screen?” 
No matter how good of your story and your writing  are, you 
may be writing a festival  film t hat won’t  get produced at all .  
 
THAT BEING SAID…  PITCH YOUR MOVIE  IDEA ... HEY NOT IN THE TRASH!  
Sometimes you pitch your idea to be hired to write your script and sometimes you pitch a completed script to sell. 
Either way you have to stand before a person or group and 
tell your idea.  Ask yourself, What did I write about  that will 
make my script sell? On e of the most powerful tools, we 
have found, is to pitch your ide a often. It's frightening and 
exhaus ting, but it  must be done. However, if we simply pitch  
our movie to someone, step by step, we  find ourselves  
restructuring our story on the cuff. Cut out the confusing stuff 
and blow a KISS –(KEEP IT SIMPLE STUPID .) 
 
We like working it out on paper  first. But what see ms to work 
on paper, then told out loud, o ften sounds confusing or 
complicated. By p itching your story to someone, it forces you 
to use your  brain to explain your story naturally . 
 The ideal person to pitch your story to, is not someone in the business.  They'll want to try and make it better . What  you 
want  to do is to pitch to a friend, relative or record yourself.  
This way you can determine if  your story sounds interest ing 
to yourself as you pitch it.  Watch your listener's eyes to see 
when and if they are  being moved.   
 

--- PAGE 44 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
37 
Like us, most writers are sh y, so you may have trouble 
working up the nerve  to do it. If you are fearful to  test pitch 
your story on someone, suck it up and do it anyway . No one 
will be able t o tell your story better than you kn ow it. Try t he 
pitch while you're driving or walking s omewhere. The parts 
where you can't remember may need to be dropped or re-
worked. If you can't remember what gets you from one step 
to the next, odds are it’s not wor king.  
Yo
u will also want to write  your "pitch" down on 
paper. This is not an outline. Y ou never want to 
read your pitch, it must always be memorized and rehearsed. It should be like a mindless mantra. 
As an actor preforms  moment to moment, so should the  
writer with their pitch.  
One
 of th e most valuable benefits of telling your story out 
loud, is it will immediately give you your answer. Say you've 
come up with one a great idea,  and you start to tell it to a  
friend, and you realize that they’ d rather be watching the 
Red Wings. You got your  answer. Nex t! 
Onc
e you've pitched and pitched and pi tched your idea, 
you'll have it down pat, and you can write it down. Then 
when you've written your script, go back and see if you've 
delivered the goods the pitch pro mised. If not, rewrite until it 
does . But if you 've really done the work of pitching your 
story, odds are you will have an extremely clear idea of the 
goods you're promising to deliver, and you'll have done your best to deliver them.  NOW YOU’RE READY  TO W ORK!  

--- PAGE 45 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
38 
3 THE JOURNEY  
MY STORY  
1.STORY CONCEPT
 Develop a one line summary of your story id ea. 
1a. THECONCEPT:  TIME TRAVEL  
MOVIE EXAMPLE:  BACK TO THE FUTURE  (1985)   
1b. SINGLE TAGLINE :  
•He's the only kid ever to get into trouble before he was born.
•17 year old Marty McFly got home early last night. 30 years early.
•Marty McFly just broke the t ime barrier. He's got one week to fix it.
•Marty was never in time. . .Then one day he wasn't in his time at all.
MO
VIE EXAMPLE:  BACK TO THE FUTURE  2 (1989)  
•Getting back was only the beginning.
•Synchronize your watches. The future's coming back...
•Roads? Where we're going, we don't need roads!
•Do You Remember... The Future?

--- PAGE 46 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
39 MOVIE EXAMPLE:  BACK TO THE FUTURE  3 (1990)  
•They'v e saved the best trip for last,. But may  have gone too far.
2. STORY GENRE
In the film busi ness, GENRE  refers to the method based 
on matches in the narrative elements from which films 
are constructed.  Choose a general Category, which 
will give you a broad, overall structure for your story . 
MOVIE E XAMPLE:  BACK TO THE FUTURE  (FRANCHISE)  
Genre:  Adventure  | Comedy  | Sci-Fi 
1a. VARIOUS  MOVIE GENRES , Where does your story fit?  
ACTION 
Die Hard  
Spiderman  
The Expendables  
ADVE
NTURE  
Indiana Jones Harry Potter  
Stand by Me  
ANIM
ATED  FAMILY  
Tin Tin  
The Incredibles 
Shre k  
CHIL
DREN 
Meet t he Robinsons  
Diary of A Wimpy  Kid 
Charlotte’s  Web 
COM EDY
 
Animal House  
Something About Mary  
Dumb and Dumber  
COM
EDY-DRAMA 
Forest Gump  
The graduate CRIM E DRAMA  
The Godfather  
Goodfellas  
Casino 
DOCUDRA
MA 
Argo  
Band of Brothers  
Serpico  
DRAMA
 
Casablanca  
Mysti c River  
Gran d Torino 
HIS
TORICAL DRAMA  
JFK 
Abe Lincoln  Gotti  
HORRO
R 
Any Chain Saw Movie  
Frankenstein  
Dracula  
ROM
ANCE  
Friends with Benefits  
The Notebook  
Pretty Woman  ROMANTIC- COMEDY  
When Harry Met Sally  
The Wedding Singer  
The Wedding Planer  
SCIEN
CE FIC TION  
Star Wa rs 
Star Trek  
Alien  
SUSP
ENSE  
Sea of Love  
Witness  
Misery  
WAR
 
Platoon  
Saving Private Ryan  
Full Metal Jacket  
SPOR
TS BIO  
Raging Bull  
*61
Cinderella M an
The longest Yard
ALI

--- PAGE 47 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
40 WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE  
BETWEEN GENRE AND STYLE?  
Ge
nre is a way by  which stories can be groups together, 
especially when r eferring to films. If a group of films have a 
common setting like location, interest, culture, time period.  Genres can be mixed like an action / adventure or a 
roman tic / comedy and so on.  
Sty
le is doing things  especially concerned with the 
mechanics o f storytelling and writing.  
A DIRE
CT STYLE : Mary bent over and picked up her 
black cat , looked at me and asked if I’d  like to stay.  
AN INT
ENSE STYLE : With a sensual passion, Mary 
stooped to the floor ; ever so gently  caressing her milky 
smooth hands around  her onyx black feline, then held it 
in her lap; petting it ever so slowly as it purred. 
Seductively , Mary starred at me with her stealthy blue 
eyes and asked if I'd like to join her for the evening.  
3.STO
RY TY PE
Within the broad structure story -telling are several different
types . What  best fits your own story.
3 A.
 TYPE: NARATIVES  
Of course a narrative story has characters, settings and 
conflict. It can be  a fictional or true story told in words. Any 
story is a narrative, whether it's written down, s hown on 
screen or spoken aloud. A movie that explains a story with 
events and details on a timeline is a narrative. That almost everything.  

--- PAGE 48 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
41 
 Some types of narratives are  fables, myths, legends, 
fairytale s, science f iction stories , short stories, parables, 
biographies, and horror stories. Again honestly, most any 
type of story -telling can be considered a narrative.  
 
HERE ARE SEVERAL  TYPES OF NARRATIVES:  
 
LINEAR, A linear  narrative is one that is told from 
beginning to  end chronologically. Most  stories  are tol d in 
this way because it is the easiest to understand.   
 
NON- LINEAR, A non- linear  narrative is one that is told 
not in chronological order . Like the movie M emento or 
The Death of Michael Smith. A story that entaile d the 
intersection of three men named Mich ael Smith  and how 
their fates were intertwined. There was extensive use of 
the flashback.  
 
MULTI -NARRATIVE,  A multi -narrative  is where 
a story  is told from multiple points of view. It can be the 
same incident seen from more than one perspective as 
well. 
 
DUAL,  A dual narrative is a form of story -telling that 
tells a  story  in two different perspectives, usually two 
different people.  It’s also an way that  one person’s stor y 
at two different points in time  
 
FRAGMENTED, A fragmented narrative  is a sequence 
of events that are presented in a non- linear  way...  A 
complication,  a resolution and a conclusion.  
 
METAFICTIVE , Metafiction , also known as  Romantic 
Irony   uses the rela tionship between fiction and reali ty, 
usually using irony  and self -reflection. It can be  
compared to an actor turning to the camera, and 
reminding the audience that they are watching a movie . 
 

--- PAGE 49 ---

RICH GOTERI & MIKE MILI 
42 
 PERSONAL , A personal narrative, is an autobiography, 
a biopic , a short story, a novel, or any literary work. It 
can also be used in fine art for pictor ial illustrative 
narrations.  
DIRECT , The narrator  describes the character s.  He looked 
like a gorilla as he scoped everyone in the room.  She was a 
huge, hairy woman that did not stop stuffing her face. 
 
INDIRECT,  The Viewer is left to judge  what the charac ters 
are like based on what they say or do. 
 
WORD CHOICE , The viewer is made to feel a certain way.  
A spooky atmosphere is created through words, pictures or 
music. 
 
PACING , The writer  controls the speed at which we watch 
the story unfold using various  techniques.  
 
POINT OF VIEW :  Whoever is narrating the story 2  types:  
 First Person , The narrator tells the story as himself.  
 Third Person, Told from a perspective outsi de the story.   
 
AN GOOD EXAMPLE O F A BASIC NARRATIVE.  
Bobby’s Day Out:  On my way to wor k, I was car jacked by 
a first time bank robber who held me hostage. After secretly hitting 911 on the cell phone in my pocket, it wasn't long before we were surrounded by the police. I tried to reason 
with the criminal who was really a good guy, who out of desperation did a bad thing. We talked a lot, the robber and I; I mean Bobby and I. There was seemingly no way out of this mess he had gotten himself into. Bobby kept  trying to 
drive on and off of the  freeway, even throwing the huge bag 
of money and bank  certificates out of the window all over the 
freeway.  Though that almost started a riot, he kept driving until we were finally cornered. I tried to convince him that he hadn't really hurt anyone and that yes he would have to go to jail; but his wife and k ids would recover from this one day 
knowing he is still alive. He apologized to me and seemed to 

--- PAGE 50 ---

WORDS TO FILM BY 
43 
 be ready to give up, telling me that he did this to help his 
wife and kids have a better life, bec ause he had failed at his 
business and life. As he clandestin ely unloaded his pistol, 
Bobby jumped out of the car screaming that he was giving  
up… But suddenly,  pointed his unloaded gun at the police, 
who open fired on him.  
 That's how I explained it to the poli ce and Mary,  Bobby's 
wife. Mary and the kids , were in that way able to find closure . 
 WOE! Was that a false ending?   
I didn't have the heart to tell Mary that Bobby was a bitter, selfish man, who cared nothing for her and the kids  and was 
trying to get eno ugh money to run away to South America 
and re- live his  youth by banging hotties. Why should his kids 
and wife pay the price for this shit bags wasted  life? 
 WOE Again! Was that really the ending? 
 
AS THE CREDITS ROLE:  
 We se e the narrator at a S outh American  Bank   
depositing a Bearer Bond worth  50 Million  dollar s. 
 We see Mary opening her mail to find a bank book 
with ten million deposited in her name.  
FADE OUT:  
 As the police closed in on Bob by's dead body The 
Narrator notices a piece of paper on the seat.  
 NARRATIVE  ELEMENTS 
  PLOT POINTS  
     THE SEQUENCE OF E VENTS THAT TAKE PLACE IN A STORY.  
• Narrator  on his way to work.  
• Narrator  is car jacked and held hostage  
• Calls police  
• Chased by police  
• Surrounded  by police  
• Narrator tries  to reason with the robber  
• Narrato r befriends Bobby.  
• Bobby seems to give up.  